Live Demonstration: ECG Sensor Interface in a Low Power SoC for Wireless Portable ECG Monitoring. I. INTRODUCTION  The demonstration will show ECG signal acquisition and processing on a dedicated System-on-a-Chip (SoC) [1], and display of the raw and processed data on the screen of a laptop. This SoC has been developed within the European project IcyHeart [2]. The objective of the IcyHeart project was to investigate and demonstrate a highly integrated and powerefficient microelectronic solution for remote monitoring of a person’s electrocardiogram (ECG) signals. A complete SoC has been developed by CSEM which embarks, on a single chip, an ultra-low power signal acquisition front-end, an analogue-to-digital converter (ADC) for ECG, a low-power 32-bit digital signal processor (DSP), and a low-energy radio frequency (RF) transceiver. The SoC enables 3-lead ECG monitoring. The software for ECG signal analysis running on the embedded processor has been developed by EPFL. It is a whole digital signal processing suite, performing 3-leads filtering, combination of the 3 signals followed by delineation of the ECG signals and finally detection of abnormalities. Raw signals as well as filtered signals and fiducial points can be transmitted by the 900 MHz RF link to an external HUB. For this purpose, Signal Generix has developed a Wireless Communication Software to enable communication between a patient module and a central station. THE DEMONSTRATION The demonstration will illustrate ECG signal acquisition and processing on the IcyHeart SoC and display of the processed data on the screen of a laptop. The set-up is illustrated on the Figure 1. It is composed of a PCB board embedding the IcyHeart SoC. The PCB board is connected to an ECG signal generator (not shown on the picture) via the 3 ECG leads and a ground lead, and is also connected via an USB cable to a laptop. The ECG signal generator enables to modulate the frequency and the amplitude of the ECG signals provided to the SoC. These signals are then digitized on-chip and processed by the embedded DSP processor. The end result is transferred via an USB link to a laptop. The screen of the laptop displays the raw signals of the 3 leads, the filtered signal and the fiducial points. Low Cost Computer Based Heart Rate Monitoring System Using Fingertip and Microphone Port. Abstract—Heart rate of a human body can be measured considering the change of blood volume in ﬁngertip using microcontroller-based methods. In this paper, a low cost and portable method is proposed and implemented to measure heart rate from ﬁngertip using the microphone port of a computer. The method detects the volume change of blood by an optical sensor based on infrared technology. The noisy output signal from the sensor is stripped out of unwanted components with the help of a hardware level active low pass ﬁlter. After interfacing through the microphone port, this signal is processed at software level to measure and monitor real time heart rate. The accuracy, noise suppression, and cost effectiveness of this method make it a suitable candidate for a low cost computer based heart monitoring system which can study and detect heart diseases like sleep arrhythmia.I. INTRODUCTION Heart rate (HR) is a measure of the number of heartbeats per unit of time, typically expressed in a unit of beats per minute (bpm). People’s heart rates vary considerably, depending on their age, gender, nature of activity, conditioning of body, and what medications they are on. Resting heart rate depends on pumping of blood through the heart and indicates the body’s basic ﬁtness level [1], [2]. It is also a predictor of energy expenditure in the body and manifests characteristic patterns for people with spinal cord injury [3] and cardiovascular diseases [4], [5], [6]. Typically, there are two types of heart rate measuring procedures: instantaneous heartrate (IHR)measurement where HR is calculated from R-R interval of ECG signal [7] and mean heart rate (MHR) estimation where mean HR is calculated after taking data for sufﬁciently long sample times. Heart rate can be measured from different sections of the body, e.g., ventral aspect of the wrist on the side of the thumb, arteries in neck, inside of the elbow, under the biceps muscle, groin region, chest section, side of the head near the ear, and lateral edge of the mandible [8]. However, one of the most easily accessible body parts that can be used for HR measurement is the human ﬁngertip. Previous projects on ﬁngertip HR meters have depended on oscilloscope and microcontroller for HR estimation [9]. This paper describes a new low cost and portable method for measuring heart rate using the microphone port of a computer and the ﬁngertip of a human body providing better noise suppression capability than oscilloscope and microcontroller based methods. This paper is organized as follows: in Section II theory necessary for the comprehension of this work is discussed. The block diagram for carrying out the proposed procedure is presented and each component of the system is delineated. Section III discusses the implementation aspects of the system at circuit level and the signal processing considerations. In Section IV measured results are presented for a number of subjects and comparison with other methods is also included. I. PROPOSED HR MEASUREMENT TECHNIQUE. This paper proposes a computer-based heart rate measurement system by optically sensing the alteration of blood volume ﬂowing through ﬁnger arteries. As the heart pumps blood and goes through systole and diastole, there is a corresponding change in the volume of blood in blood vessels of the ﬁngertip. Now, if a light source can be focused on this region, then the amount of reﬂected or scattered light will depend on changes in the blood ﬂow. This variation in scattered light signals can be reﬂected in the output electrical pulses with the use of a proper transducer. The magnitude of these output pulses is typically very small and include signiﬁcant spurious components; hence noise removal becomes necessary to obtain a correct output. Noise present in the sensor output can be reduced by precisely designed hardware level ﬁltering. Finally, after small amplitude noise remove dsignals are interfaced with a computer for software level processing, heart rate can be calculated accurately with the help of an appropriate signal processing tool. The ﬁrst step of the proposed method is to project an optical ray of suitable wavelength on the ﬁngertip in order to detect the change in blood volume during a cycle of systole and diastole. This can be done by using an infrared (IR) light emitting diode (LED) which emits infrared rays on the ﬁngertip. The next step is to capture the reﬂected signals and convert these optical pulses to electrical signals by a photodiode. Now, this infrared LED and the photodiode (which capture the biological input signal) constitute the sensor section of the proposed system. The output of the sensor includes many unwanted components and is very noisy. As the amplitude of the electrical pulses is very small and comparable with noise strength in the sensor output, it is a challenging task to remove these components from the signal and make it suitable for interfacing with a computer. An active low pass ﬁlter based on an operational ampliﬁer is used to assist in the noise reduction process. In the next step, the output of the ﬁlter section has to be transferred to a computer in order to enable software level digital signal processing. The uniqueness of this work environment is that the interfacing is done through the microphone (line-in) port of a computer with the help of a commercial audio jack. After signal processing is performed with a processing tool, the heart rate can be measured and monitored in real time allowing us to evaluate the subject’s heart condition in home environment. III. IMPLEMENTATION In this section the physical implementation of the block diagram will be discussed with details of circuit components, design criteria, and power supply requirements. A. Sensor Circuit. The sensor circuit consists of two parts: emitter and receiver diodes, as shown in Fig. 2. Its emitter is built with an infrared LED (TLN201) that transmits infrared rays through the ﬁngertip vessels of the human body. A part of the signal is reﬂected by the blood cells where the amount of scattering will depend on change in blood volume and is correlated with the heart cycle. The reﬂected signal, which carries information about blood volume, is detected by the receiver circuit through a photodiode sensor (TPS601A). There is also a 1 kΩ resistor in series with the emitter diode for limiting the driving current and a 10 kΩ resistor and a 1 µF capacitor to complete the receiver circuit for detection. Here the photodiode converts the optical pulses and the output at point A is a train of electrical pulses containing information about changing blood volume and heart cycle. The circuit is powered with a 5V regulated bias supply.B. Active Low Pass Filter The output from the photodetector bears information about the heart rate but requires processing to remove its unwanted components. The signal becomes noisy as it collects signal elements from surrounding components and power supply. As the heart is constantly pumping blood, it can be estimated that the sensor output at point A will be a train of alternating pulses. The problematic factor is that the varying amplitude of the output signal from the sensor is relatively small. This creates a detection problem when the noise amplitude is matched with the core signal level, making it difﬁcult to distinguish between them. In order to obtain a reading of heart rate, the output at point A has to be passed through a low pass ﬁlter with a DC blocking capacitor, as shown in Fig. 2. For separating the alternating pulse components, DC signal part is blocked by a 1 µF capacitor, placed between point A and node 3 in the ﬁgure. The DC blocked signal is passed through the active low pass ﬁlter built with an operational ampliﬁer IC (LM741). The ﬁxation of the ﬁlter’s cut-off frequency affects the performance of the system to a great extent. From published reports, it is known that heart rate of a normal person varies between 60 bpm and 100 bpm [8]. In this work, the cut-off frequency of the ﬁlter is set to 2.34 Hz, so that major signal components are recovered and heart rates can be measured upto 150 bpm. The ampliﬁer is biased with a 12V supply and employs two 68 kΩ resistors. The gain of this ﬁlter branch is set to 2. The ﬁltering also removes high frequency noise components and the ﬁltered output from point C is delivered to the microphone port of a desktop computer using a commercial audio jack.C. Signal Processing The proposed method performs signal processing at software level to measure the heart rate of a human body. The output at node C in Fig. 2 can be seen in an oscilloscope to monitor the heart rate. But this gives an opportunity for large magnitude noise components from chords and power line to corrupt the ﬁltered signal. In order to avoid these sources of noise, the output at point C is interfaced directly to the microphone port of the computer. The analog signal is read via the processing software MATLAB with standard audio sampling frequency. For the calculation of heart rate for an individual subject, it is necessary to know number of pulses per minute as an indicator of the rate at which heart pumps blood by periodic contraction and expansion. The data from the ﬁngertip is collected initially for intervals of thirty seconds in duration. As the pulse amplitudes are very small, the gain of the signal is set to a sufﬁciently high value. After discounting the idle times for placement and removal of the ﬁngertip, the data from the ﬁve to twenty seconds interval is used during signal processing to measure the heart rate. To measure the periodic change in blood volume, the total number of peaks in the periodic signal within the stipulated time is calculated via signal processing and four times of the measured value determines the heart rate (HR) for the subject. Fig. 3 shows the sensor and the ﬁlter circuits on a bread board and how the ﬁltered signal is interfaced through the line-in port. In this work, the ﬁltered signal is transferred to the computer through the microphone port and monitored with the help of the MATLAB processing platform. In particular, the Data Acquisition Toolbox of MATLAB is used to sample and collect the signal from the line-in port. Fig. 4 presents the recording of raw ﬁltered data collected over a period of thirty seconds for subject 1 (Age: 23 years). It can be seen that there are two sharp transitions at their 5 and 25 second points during the recording interval. It indicates that at the 5 second point the ﬁngertip is placed between IR diode and photodiode for measuring the heart rate and at the time of 25 seconds the ﬁnger is removed from the position. Fig. 5 presents the processed signal data for a second subject after the signal is ampliﬁed for better estimation of peaks. The peak near 25 seconds represents the removal of the ﬁnger in this ﬁgure and the ﬁnger was placed over the diode before the recording command was given. Moreover, a periodicity in the ﬁltered pulses can be seen in the 5-20 s interval (processing period) for both cases which is an indicator of HR.During the measurement, the subject’s ﬁnger has to be placed in the precise position with respect to emitter and receiver diodes. A non-transparent piece of material is placed between the sensor diodes so that the receiving photodiode only collects signals reﬂected from the ﬁngertip. The recording command is provided at software level and the signal is recorded for a duration of 30 seconds. The gain for the signal can be controlled within the processing environment for detection. Fig. 6 and 7 present a magniﬁed version of the real time signals collected from the two subjects. The signals show that the calculated heart rates will be 92 bpm for subject 1 and 84 bpm for subject 2. To test the accuracy of the measurements, the heart rate is also measured from the ventral side of the wrist with traditional pulse checking. The manual HR reading is measured as 86 bpm for subject 1 and 80 bpm for subject 2 which are consistent with the values calculated by the proposed setup. When the process is repeated for a number of subjects, the two set of data remain consistent for all the occasions. The ﬁngertip has to be placed carefully in the beginning in order to avoid unusual readings resulting from jerking or hand movement. The results can be assessed to determine whether the measured HR is normal or high depending on age and gender of the subject. Furthermore, this system is cost effective, portable, easy to operate, and compatible with typical personal computers, allowing us to realize a low-cost computer based heart rate (HR) monitoring system usable in home environment. V. CONCLUSIONS Heart rate (HR) is an important indicator of health and low resting heart rate may indicate that the body is in better condition. Heart rate is typically measured from ECG signals or using microcontroller-based systems. In this paper, a low-cost home-based method for measuring heart rate is proposed. This method allows the physician to keep records in a personal computer and provides greater resistance to ambient noise due to the use of microphone port for signal capturing. As it is a computer-based method, it can analyze the signal pattern with a software and support a sleep arrhythmia detection system before the condition of the patient become serious. It has the potential to be extended to a cost-effective heart rate monitoring system capable of supporting recording of blood pressure, blood volume, pulse rate, and facilitating various disease detection systems. Design and implementation of digital heart rate counter by using the 8051 microcontrollers. Abstract— The heart is an organ of human body which has a dynamic function, slight abnormalities in the heart functions could obligate life-threatening. The ability to provide accurate heart rate can save patients from serious death. The purpose of this article, is how   to design a low cost and mobile heart-rate counting system based on the microcontroller for monitoring heart health. The heart pulse was acquired by using IR finger-tip sensor, based on this biomedical signal a conditioning circuit was designed for filtering these signals and processing it. As well, the processed signal was countered using a microcontroller and displayed on seven segment display. The results of this study are expected to let the physician team to monitor and easily reading heart rate. Based on the test results, the designed system gave a good response and an accurate heart rate counting with accepted low percentage error comparison to manual measurement. The designed system can be interface with personal computers. This will give opportunities to perform further analysis to distinguish and predict any other heart disease. However, the presented method in this developed system needs further investigation and need more functionality, which may be useful to consider in future research. I. INTRODUCTION The heart rate is refer to the number of times the heart beats in one minute. Pulse rates are different from one person to another one. The pulses are counted in order to detect that the heart is pumping enough blood and to give an indication about the symptoms (an irregular heartbeat, dizziness, fainting, chest pain, or shortness of breath, and check for blood flow after an injury or blood vessel blocked) due to the above reasons the pulse counting process are important task which should be save human life. The conventional method for counting the heart pulses is via locating the thumb above the matter’s arterial throb then sensation and clock pulse counting are commonly accomplished within a 15 second epoch. The recorded number of beats can be multiplied by 4 to get the number of heart beats over one minute. As this approach is not complex but still not precise, in addition to be able to perform this produce in accuracy once as an experience physician. As well, an advanced system to compute the heart beating ratio using monitoring device and Electrocardiogram (ECG), where these devices are given a precise record for computing the heart pulses . Unfortunately, the ECG and monitoring system cannot be used independently by patients them self to detect a patient's pulse because it requires special skills. In addition to the expensive cost for these devices.   This system proposed to use low cost microcontroller based system  which counts the heart beating by fast measuring method using any  of finger-tumble (using body fluid measurements), the change that appearing in blood flow inside the member vein be easily detected by means of a simple photosensitive beam technique that transduce this change in blood flow to electrical signal which processing it to be in form of square wave so on, a microcontroller count this pulses according to designed algorithm  and showing the end result  on a7-segment display.  II. The Fingertip sensor essentially contains an infrared source LED (light emitting diode) and an infrared photo-transistor and it's sensing process are clarified in fig. (2), in this process the released infrared toward the finger will be reflected from the vein and by the photo-transistor the different in intensity due to the different in blood flow will be detected. This detected signal are purified then enlarged properly after that is send to a low-price based microcontroller. The microcontroller counts the sum of beats during a specific interval and then produce the heart ratio of the patient. A frequent analysis had done depend on an identified interval then the estimates are approximated by calculating the average value in order to provide a precise evaluation of the heart ratio. The final heart-rate ratio is showing by using a 7-segment display in beats-per-minute. III. HARDWARE DESIGN This includes all hardware parts implemented in the intended device. This can be summarized by subsequent stages: A. Finger-tip Sensor It involves an infrared (IR) diode source (transmitter) coupled with an IR photo sensor (receiver). The IR bright throws across the soft tissue. Changes in the quantity of blood in the veins then the capacity of light that incidence upon the IR sensor as shown in fig.2. Fig. 3 shows the pulse detection circuit B. Conditioning circuit    A conditioner circuit used to accomplish signal conditioning procedure which contains the following stages: 1) Filters: High pass and low pass filters used to eliminate all noise signals may be equipped with the original signal. 2nd – order high pass filter to eliminate the drift voltage due to the tremble of finger or DC biasing voltage of the photo coupler. In fact, it can make sure that the next circuit stage will not operate under saturation. 4th- order low – pass filter is adopted not only to eliminate the interference of power source, but also to avoid the noise of high frequency.   2) Gain amplifier: Bio-signals are considered as low voltage level signals.  So, we must amplifier this signal to a higher voltage level which ensures an accurate measurement and calculation for the bio-signal under study. The amplifier circuit designed to amplify the signal and make phase shifting. Thus, it avoids the distortion in next detection circuit. 3) Differentiator: The differentiator is fundamentally act as a high pass filter where high frequency with little input voltage signal result higher voltage at output. It is able to produce a square signal after a trio signal entered, and will fluctuated as a quadric signal is entered a spike voltage result [7], [8]. In perfect instances, a differentiator will opposite the causes of an integrator going on a signal, and vice versa. Therefore, they are frequently utilized in wave-modelling to determine an excessive frequency element within an entered signal. 4) Comparator: For comparing dual voltages. Once one is greater than another the comparator path yield results in one status, and while the set-in states are inverted, in these cases the comparator output inverted too. In our device, it is employed to detect voltages. They might have a testimonial voltage at certain input. When the identified voltage is exceeding the testimonial the output of the comparator will appearing in one state. If the sensed voltage decreases less the testimonial now it will modify the status of the comparator. 5) Mono-stable multi-vibrator: It is can be used as a simple effective oscillator. As a result of their simplicity, stable multi-vibrator attain usages within a category of various applications wherever square signals or timetabled periods are essential [8]. After comparator circuit, square waveform will be generated. This square wave will trigger mono stable multi vibrator and become a square wave with stable pulse which is synchronized with heart beat. It is known that human blood pressure and heart rate will both rise during exercise. When they reach to certain limit, the peripheral capillaries will be fully enlarged. At this time, no or very little change of vessel volume will be detected. Mono stable multi vibrator produced a pulse by positive trigger signal. C.  Microcontroller      It is a microprocessor with crystal and input-output ports. In this project the 8051microcontroller had been used to calculate heart pulses and it is presented in fig.4. It is received a signal from multi-vibrator stage as a pulsating signal and start counting the pulses passed through fifteen seconds and multiply by 4. Then, the counting results which represent heart rate drive to the display element.  7-Segment display     The seven segments are used for display the number of beat in specific time and the type of this seven segments is a common cathode where two digit of seven segment LT-541 chip have been used is showed  in fig.5. Each of seven segment is linked to oscillator stick upon the 8051 as shows within fig.6. So as to glow up a sector on the pin should be fix to 0Volt. To trip a sector off the equivalent stickpin ought be fit to 5Volt. this is easily achieved via settle on the pins at the 8051 to '1' or '0'. IV. SOFTWARE DESIGN Software was developed using the popular Ride 8051 assembler and simulator. Assembly language used to write the code.  The designed code algorithm is described as a flow-chart shown in fig.7. V. PROPOSED DEVICE OPERATION     The principles of operation are quite simple. And the following steps can perform easily to use the system: 1- Switch on the supply 2- Put the finger on the sensor 3- Wait for 15 sec to counting process 4- Remove finger 5-results show on display. 6- Wait 10 sec to another counting or press reset switch, and start another counting. The snapshot of the heart rate device setup and end result. The number displayed on 7-segment display represents heart rate counting.  Fig. 8-b explains graphs at different stage of counting process showed on the oscilloscope screen. The first signal represents the actual electrocardiograph of the person putted his finger on the sensor. And the second graph represents the output of multi vibratos stage, which then entered to the counting circuit shown in fig.9. Many counting tacked for different cases ad different persons, all of them explained in table I. With the percentage error between our device reading and manual reading intended. VII. CONCLUSIONS     The proposed system is designed and implemented practically. This mobile and low-price based microcontroller system can count and give real precise heart pulse reading. As well as to its high precision the device can be used to monitor heart beat for patient during movement. Wide range device reading for different patient cases were taken and indicated the reliability of the proposed system. It is recommended for future work to consider sound pulses to give hearing indication and also thresholds for maximum and minimum heart rates can be considered to worn abnormalities of heart pumping. Finally the recorded data can be interface to PC for farther processing to detect the heart diseases. A 2.5 GHz Wireless ECG System for Remotely Monitoring Heart Pulses. Abstract—A wireless electrocardiograph technology (WECG) which works on 2.5 GHz frequency band has been designed, implemented and evaluated in the actual environments both indoor and outdoor. WECG system has the benefit for improving the quality of the health care services especially for monitoring and evaluating people heart pulses record during the treatments. These are also practically useful to apply on a number medical cases, for instance, the heart disease treatment, early medical treatment at the disaster areas (e.g. earthquake, tsunami, the traffic accident on the road), other remote medical monitoring in health care centers, or intensive care units at the hospital. The WECG technology allows the medical authorities such as doctor and nurses capable to monitor the patients flexibly and immediately from a remote location. The read range testing of wireless ECG system to perform on monitoring the heart pulses was carried out. At indoor environments it can read up to the distance of more than 50 m. When operating at LOS outdoor environment the master unit and local ECG sensor unit can communicate for the distance longer than 250 m.  Keywords – Wireless ECG, sensor device, and wave propagation environment. INTRODUCTION Currently the wireless sensor network technology has been specifically applied for many purposes such as for measuring the heart rate signal, for monitoring the rehabilitation process of patients remotely, telemedicine monitoring, analysis of body movements for the physiotherapy treatment, and many others [1-4]. There are various types of wireless electrocardiograph (WECG) has been developed [1, 3-4]. For example, [3] proposed an internet-based wireless technology to monitor the patient's medical condition in order to record medical data continuously. Meanwhile, [4] previously implemented a prototype of telemedicine system that utilizes the flexible technical benefits of a PDA-based telecommunications system.  The preliminary research activity for the development of a reliable wireless sensor prototype for monitoring and recording the environmental parameters have been studied in [4]. The initial system was powerful to utilizes when transferring several important parameters such as temperature, light intensity, smoke levels, and others through of the existing sensor node and remote station connections. Inspiring from the research the typical WECG is currently under investigated by our research group. This technology is very important utilized especially in the condition in a hospital where the availability of the number of nurses or doctors on duty compared to the number of patients to be served is less. Very hard to imagine an increase in quality of service from hospital to patient if such conditions continue exist. Utilization of wireless sensing technology within the hospital network will impact on the increasing of the efficiency and optimization of resources, manpower and time.  This paper presents one typical model of health monitoring systems that have been studied for several years at the Department of Electrical Engineering UNHAS. One interesting prototype is wireless ECG used to monitor heart rate signals of patients. Using WECG technique will allow a group of nurses or doctors simply monitor the condition of the patient through a remote room that is connected to a wireless sensor network system. The future development of the proposed wireless ECG technology will be continued to a number of technical issues including variations in series of studies related to the utility of more sensitive and precise electrodes sensor to detect the human heart pulses. Other interesting experiment could include the examination of various heart pulses characteristics from very large group of patients and the construction issues such as compactness, easiness, flexibility, simplicity and safety of installation WECG on patient body must be considered.  An advanced study regarding the performance of wireless ECG systems in a variety of wireless propagation environment (indoor and outdoor) and the read range capability of ECG system. These will be further discussed later.  II. WIRELESS ECG CONFIGURATION A typical WECG system used to monitor heart rate signals of patients is illustrated in Fig.1. The designed WECG can serve about n number of ECG sensor nodes to monitor patients in one room and one of the ECG sensor nodes will act as a remote sensor station and communicate directly to the master unit. In practice, the ECG network can have up to kth arrays of sensor unit. The whole WECG nodes are configured in tree topology to allow the extension of the read range distance between nodes could be achieved. In Fig.2, the more detailed visualisation of the implemented WECG is presented. The sensor node consists of ECG unit (configured from electrodes sensors, series of filters, signal conditioning circuits), microcontrollers, Xbee module and antenna system. It will continuously transmit the sensed patient's heart pulses through free space propagation channel. At the sink node, the captured RF-signals will be sequentially processed and finally plotted at PC monitor using Borland Delphi program. Wireless ECG System Performance The development of WECG system, as implicitly explained previously, consisted of two main parts, i.e. the hardware and the software aspects. To guarantee that the hardware design was constructed in a proper way therefore the research was started by studying the related physiological characteristics of the heart signals, measuring the ECG signals conventionally, and to analyze of how the ECG works. By studying the existing ECG, researchers can find out in detail the parts to build and this becomes a reference for designing the intended ECG to meet the required specifications.  The WECG hardware specifications are explained below. The sensor node consists of several essential parts including DC regulator power supply unit (Voltage interval 3.3-5 Volts output), ECG sensor, 8-bit microcontroller AT mega 8535L, a transceiver chip Xbee-Pro 2.4 GHz (Tx-power 1mW and Receiver sensitivity -92 dBm) and an antenna system (integrated with chip or built up). The expected RF-data rate in WECG is approximately 250 kbps. Meanwhile, sink node (master unit) is built from a transceiver chip Xbee-Pro 2.4 GHz, MAX232 interface, DC power supply, and a PC/Laptop. Another most important testing on WECG circuit was done on the signal conditioning part in order to examine the accuracy on generating the actual heart pulse from human body. Several part of the ECG signal conditioning circuit (SCC) were measured including buffer circuits, instrumentation amplifiers, driven right leg, non-inverting amplifier, analog filters, and clamping circuits. Technical understanding of these parts is very useful on distinguishing the actual heart electrical signals of human body to further process and suppressing the noise level. The following technical specifications represent the actual electrical properties obtained from the circuit testing including the SCC input signal ± 5 mV; CMRR > 100 dB; and signal Bandwidth of 0.5 - 100 Hz. The read range testing of wireless ECG system to perform on monitoring the heart pulses was carried out. At indoor environments it can read up to the distance of more than 50 m. When operating at LOS outdoor environment the master unit and local ECG sensor unit can communicate for the distance longer than 250 m. IV. CONCLUSIONS A typical prototype of wireless electrocardiograph system (WECG) has been presented. The WECG model was tested in various wireless environment both indoor and outdoor in order to evaluate its feasibility to apply in a particular health monitoring facility. Some technical issues including the accuracy and safety reasons must be studied further in the real medical centers under the doctor evaluation and supervision. Academic Program Models for Undergraduate Biomedical Engineering. Abstract— There is a proliferation of medical devices across the globe for the diagnosis and therapy of diseases. Biomedical engineering (BME) plays a significant role in healthcare and advancing medical technologies thus creating a substantial demand for biomedical engineers at undergraduate and graduate levels.  There has been a surge in undergraduate programs due to increasing demands from the biomedical industries to cover many of their segments from bench to bedside.  With the requirement of multidisciplinary training within allottable duration, it is indeed a challenge to design a comprehensive standardized undergraduate BME program to suit the needs of educators across the globe. This paper’s objective is to describe three major models of undergraduate BME programs and their curricular requirements, with relevant recommendations to be applicable in institutions of higher education located in varied resource settings.   Model 1 is based on programs to be offered in large research-intensive universities with multiple focus areas. The focus areas depend on the institution’s research expertise and training mission. Model 2 has basic segments similar to those of Model 1, but the focus areas are limited due to resource constraints. In this model, co-op/internship in hospitals or medical companies is included which prepares the graduates for the work place. In Model 3, students are trained to earn an Associate Degree in the initial two years and they are trained for two more years to be BME’s or BME Technologists. This model is well suited for the resource-poor countries. All three models must be designed to meet applicable accreditation requirements.   The challenges in designing undergraduate BME programs include manpower, facility and funding resource requirements and time constraints.  Each academic institution has to carefully analyze its short term and long-term requirements. In conclusion, three models for BME programs are described based on large universities, colleges, and community colleges. Model 1 is suitable for research-intensive universities. Models 2 and 3 can be successfully implemented in higher education institutions with low and limited resources with appropriate guidance and support from international organizations. The models will continually evolve mainly to meet the industry needs. Index Terms— biomedical engineering education; program models; curriculum design I. INTRODUCTION The population of the world is continuously increasing. It is interesting to learn that the life expectancy is also moving to higher levels globally. Most people encounter serious healthcare problems in later segments of their life. These factors create huge demand for growth of medical devices for disease diagnosis, therapy and rehabilitation. As a logical consequence, the demands for undergraduate and graduate Biomedical Engineering (BME) programs are also consistently growing. There is certainly a need to develop suitable BME educational programs to meet the surges in the demands of the biomedical industry experiencing proliferations of their products. Appropriately trained human resources in the BME field are absolutely necessary for balanced coverage in the biomedical engineering field. The requirements for human resources in BME vary depending on the presence of medical device manufacturing industry in a given country or region. The requirements are also somewhat linked with the classification of countries as low, medium and high resource nations. There are numerous entry-level BME jobs at the international level. These markets have created surges in the undergraduate BME programs worldwide. One model curriculum will not necessarily fit all the BME programs. The objective of this paper is to describe three different models of undergraduate BME program and their curricular requirements, with recommendations to apply them in institutions of higher education depending on national or regional needs. II. BACKGROUND Traditional Bachelor of Science (B.S.) degrees in engineering disciplines such as electrical, mechanical, chemical followed by electronics, communications, environmental, manufacturing and materials have been in existence for several decades. However, B.S. programs in BME have been growing in countries with low and medium resources only over the last decade. This study is based on review of several versions of BME curricula in US universities and colleges, which are followed to a great extent in many countries such as Canada, Australia, Singapore, China, Mexico, Malaysia and many other countries. In a typical B.S. (BME) program, students take courses for four years. In a given semester of four to five courses, students take courses with typically 3 credits (3 hours weekly) for Lectures. Lab courses typically have 1 credit corresponding to two to three-hour labs. There are numerous variations in the programs in terms of number of years of study, number of credits required, co-op or internship requirement, special tracks of concentration, undergraduate research experience requirement, study-abroad or service-learning requirement combination with preprofessional programs, etc. III. B.S. (BME) CURRICULUM DESIGN Several factors need to be taken into extent of common curriculum, relative focus on theory vs. practice, and the relative effort to expend on undergraduate vs. graduate education. The principal goal should be to produce adaptive experts that can respond to new technologies and new situations when changing jobs [1]. Significant variations occur from one BME program curriculum to another. The variations are beneficial to students since industry maybe looking for different skill sets and knowledge base. However, the core program must be consistent with requirements of ABET or other accreditation agency if the program seeks such accreditation. Thus, some common attributes are needed to specify minimum basic characteristics of a biomedical engineer. It has been stated that all undergraduate programs should come to agreement on a core of material that should be taught to all biomedical engineering undergrads, considered as key concepts [2]. Programs can then build out the rest of the curriculum in unique ways that take advantage of their local strengths and their perceptions of the future of the field.  The Biomedical Engineering program requires basic preparation in fundamental courses of mathematics, physical and life sciences. Courses such as Calculus, Physics, Chemistry and Biology are recommended and must be completed within the first two years. The students are also required to get deeper knowledge in two or three disciplines in engineering in order to learn and gain expertise in the multi-disciplinary BME. While designing a comprehensive biomedical engineering curriculum, the key areas considered in traditional programs are biomedical instrumentation, biomedical sensors, biomechanics, biomaterials, orthotics and prosthetics, rehabilitation engineering, biomedical imaging, clinical engineering, biosignal processing and modeling, medical informatics, etc. [3]. Another grouping reported by the Whitaker Foundation includes biomechanics, biosystems, bioinstrumentation, cell/molecular engineering, and biomaterials.  Core courses in BME must be clearly defined, as this will lay the foundation for the student in the focus BME courses and in the biomedical field. Special Elective and Advanced courses in BME may be included based on available faculty expertise, infrastructure, labs, graduate programs and ongoing research projects [4]. Program must be dynamic to include emerging areas in BME. Students are required to do at least two semesters of Capstone courses. Inclusion of cooperative experiential learning is highly recommended [5]. The REU students develop an interest in the process and methods of engineering education research; in many cases, they made significant contributions to the development and/or classroom evaluation of course materials. They also simultaneously learned a specific program of biomedical engineering in depth. REU paves the way for graduate work in biomedical engineering and entrepreneurial ventures. IV. UNDERGRADUATE BME CURRICULUM A. BME CURRICULUM MODEL I Model I of the undergraduate BME curriculum is based on BME programs at large, research-intensive universities. The curriculum is divided into basic sciences, mathematics, engineering, computing, core and focus areas in BME, humanities, social sciences and free electives. Focus areas depend on the institution’s research expertise and training mission. Some universities that follow this model are Johns Hopkins University, Georgia Tech., Duke University, University of California San Diego, Boston University, etc. Following the completion of the undergraduate program, a substantial percentage of students go for graduate studies in BME, Medicine, Law and to MBA program after a couple of years of work experience.  B. BME CURRICULUM MODEL II Model II of the undergraduate BME curriculum is common at institutions that are teaching intensive colleges. The model, similar to Model I, includes basic areas of sciences, mathematics, engineering, computing, BME core and focus areas, humanities, social sciences and free electives. However, the focus areas are limited due to several reasons, namely, faculty, graduate students and funded research constraints. As an example, in one program, the focus areas chosen are medical devices and systems and clinical engineering. Co-op/Internship is also required and can be completed in hospitals, medical companies and other hosts [6, 7]. Several institutes that follow Model II are WIT, NJIT, MSoE, Drexel, UConn and RIT.  The information on the ABET accredited undergraduate Biomedical Engineering or Bioengineering programs can be found from ABET Database, Whitaker Foundation Database, American Society of Engineering Education Database, and in the relevant webpages of individual universities and colleges offering undergraduate biomedical engineering and bioengineering program. C. BME CURRICULUM MODEL III Model III is set up such that the students are trained to work as BME Technologists in the field. Typically students earn an Associate Degree in Engineering or Engineering Technology and then proceed to a bachelor’s degree in Biomedical Engineering Technology. This is equivalent to Polytechnic Programs. The Associate degree recipients are trained to work as BME Technicians in the initial stages. In the subsequent two years, the students are trained to be BME’s or BME Technologists. Models of this sort are generally followed in programs offered by IUPUI, DeVry University, etc. In order for students to transfer to a BME Program, students have to take Calculus-based courses as in Model II – type programs.  The biomedical engineering requirements in higher education institutions in low-resource countries are very different due to lack of manufacturing, research and development activities. In these countries, a modified version of Model III may be adopted. Based on the actual needs in the field, a larger share of laboratory courses and hands-on work are considered. Project work to meet the needs in local hospitals will be beneficial to the students as well as to the hospitals and clinics. With regional end-user involvement, partial funding could be sought from available resources. Top students in the program may transfer to BME Engineering programs if they wish to pursue graduate studies or be involved in research and development activities. These students may transfer to universities or colleges offering Model I or Model II BME programs at other countries. Bulk of the graduates from universities offering Model III programs can handle large portions of the hospital clinical engineering work very effectively. Complex equipment systems can be handled through special service contracts. The author has extensive experience in biomedical engineering students using all of the proposed models at various universities and colleges. BME programs conforming to Model I structure were conducted at the University of Rhode Island, University of Miami and NTU in Singapore. A significant amount of time and effort was spent in developing Model II - type program at Wentworth Institute of Technology. Varied interactions were made for the Model III programs in Southern Illinois University, Ngee Ann Polytechnic (Singapore) and Bunker Hill Community College in Boston. A few programs in India, France and England were studied based on collaborations and interactions with students from the specified countries. Models are related to research-intensive VI. DISCUSSION The average percentage of the total credits for each area for the three presented models are: Math 12%, Sciences 16%, Engineering 21%, Biomedical Engineering 32% and Humanities/Social Science Electives 20%. Variations are adopted in the institutions to suit the faculty expertise, institutional goals and emerging trends.  Graduation rates are higher in Model 1 followed by Model 2. Larger percentages of graduates from Model 1 pursue higher studies. Model 2 and Model 3 graduates fill most entry-level BME positions. Model 3 students tend to take more than 4 years and sometimes up to 6 years to complete the program. Also common in many schools is an Engineering major (such as Electrical Engineering or Mechanical Engineering) with a concentration in BME. Concentration may require students to take more courses (more credit hours) [8]. Some universities have a five-year B.S.+M.S. Program (similar to European). In all models, meeting accreditation requirements will be an institutional priority. Some challenges include manpower, facility requirements, funding for program development and sustainability, time constraints, attracting and retaining good students and recruiting dedicated faculty. Institutional, Regional and National requirements need to be met. Market demand is an important factor for undergraduate and graduate level. Following globalization, graduates can seek jobs available worldwide.  Human resource development starts with undergraduate training. Rapid technological advancements and applications to the medical field necessitate BME graduates to have continuing education and life-long learning. Many organizations have funds for staff career growth and pay for graduate studies. In conclusion, three models for BME programs are described based on large universities, colleges, and community colleges. Model 1 is suitable for research-intensive universities. Models 2 and 3 can be successfully implemented in higher education institutions with low and limited resources with appropriate guidance and support from international organizations. The models will continually evolve mainly to meet the healthcare delivery market needs and biomedical industry demands.


