Abstract—This article proposes the idea of using Solar Energy (SE) as a source of power for designing and developing a stan-dalone air-cooling system. This type of application is particularly suited for rural areas that have a considerable amount of solar radiation and have no access to grid systems. The proposed system is comprised of a photovoltaic (PV) array, DC-DC boost converter and DC-DC buck converter. Two Permanent Magnet Brushless Direct Current (PMBLDC) motors are employed to drive a centrifugal water pump and an air blower coupled to their individual shafts. The air blower is connected with a DC-DC boost converter that ensures a maximum power point (MPP) operation. A centrifugal water pump is connected with a DC-DC buck converter. The challenging task in an air cooling system is to maintain the constant speed of the blower under variable irradiance conditions. The power provided by the solar PV array can be shared between the two DC-DC converters in such a way that the BLDC motor connected with the blower will maintain a constant speed by maintaining the constant voltage of the DC-DC boost converter. The rest of the available PV power will be handled by the pump. The suitability of the proposed system for various perturbations is evaluated by simulating the proposed system using a MATLAB/Simulink and is validated by conducting experiments. Case studies have been performed with a variable PV irradiance and the results are explored. INTRODUCTION THE rate of energy consumption is increasing very rapidly due to increases in population, industrialization, trans-portation, etc. and the energy supply is depleting due to the annihilation of fossil fuels, resulting in inflation and energy shortages. This paves the way for exploring other available renewable resources. Among all the renewables, solar is the most abundant and the effective harvest of this energy can easily fulfil t he p resent energy demands o f t he world [1]. Though the extraction of energy from the sun is a bit costly, the reduction in the cost of power electronic devices and Solar Panels in recent years along their increased lifetime [2] has increased the usage of solar photovoltaic (PV) based generation for various household and industrial applications. Although several researches have been carried out on PV array fed automotive and irrigation systems combining various DC-DC converters and motor drives [3]–[6], very little work has been done on PV based home appliances. Further, the applications of BLDC motors are expanding, as these motors are highly reliable, highly efficient, with low radio frequency interference, noise and high torque/inertia ratio with improved cooling, and require practically no maintenance [5], [6]. Due to these merits, a BLDC motor is considered to help develop a solar PV fed air cooler, which can operate satisfactorily for longer time periods as compared to brushed motors under dynamically changing atmospheric conditions. The Perturb & Observe (P&O) based maximum power point tracking (MPPT) algorithm [7] is used to control the DC-DC converter such that the solar PV system always operates at its MPP. The challenging issue in designing a solar air cooler as compared to solar pumps [4]–[6] is to maintain the constant speed of the motor that drives the air blower. In the process of maintaining the constant speed of the air blower, power imbalance occurs between the PV source and the load which otherwise leads to a continuous rise or fall in the DC capacitor voltage. To avoid this power imbalance and to manage DC voltage within limits, an additional BLDC motor is used which can be used to drive the pump load in the cooler. Two three-phase voltage source inverters (VSI) are used to feed the BLDC motors driving the cooler mechanical loads. The inverters are operated at fundamental frequencies which are obtained from the motor running speed which reduces the switching losses in the inverter [6]. A hall sensor-based scheme is adopted to obtain the speed and position of the BLDC motor [8]. The electronic commutator provides the gate pulses to the inverter circuit and hence controls the pattern of the stator currents of the BLDC motor. An inner hysteresis current controller based speed controller scheme is adopted which controls the motor speed control and also limits the current flowing through the inverter and the BLDC motor which is used to drive the air blower. Further, an optimal power extraction from the SPV system is given in [12]–[14]. This paper is organized as follows: Section II describes the configuration of the solar air cooler system. The designing procedure for individual components of the solar air cooler is illustrated in Section III. Section IV explains the control schematic used for both the BLDC motors along with the DC voltage control. The performance evaluation of the air cooler is described in Section V while being subjected to different perturbations. Section VI provides the experimental analysis and finally Section VII presents the conclusions of the paper. II. SOLAR AIR COOLER SYSTEM CONFIGURATION The existing [1] solar air cooler schematic is shown in Fig. 1 and the proposed system configuration is shown in Fig. 2 respectively. The input power is obtained by using a Solar PV panel connected in an array fashion, a DC-DC (boost) converter, along with a voltage source inverter (VSI) and two BLDC motors with an air blower and pump loads coupled to their shafts which are the basic building components of a solar air cooler. The BLDC motor has an inbuilt encoder which encodes the signal generated by the Hall sensors. These signals are sent to the electronic commutator which controls the gate pulses of the inverter feeding the BLDC accordingly. The detailed working operation of the proposed solar air cooler is explained in upcoming sections. motors converts the DC input power fed from the DC-DC converter to the AC power that powers up the BLDC motor to drive the centrifugal pump and the blower fan coupled to their respective shafts. The important drawbacks of the proposed converter [1] are, not being able to handle the power sharing properly in the variable irradiance/dynamic conditions. Furthermore, the use of two three phase inverters makes the system so bulky and causes a reduction in its efficiency. Hence, a modified solar air cooling system is proposed with a half bridge voltage source converter. To ensure that the speed of the blower is constant, a stiff voltage is maintained at the end of the boost converter. The detailed operation is provided in Section III. DESIGN OF SOLAR AIR COOLER SYSTEM For development of an efficient and effective air cooler system that is capable to operate under various uncertain conditions, designing of all the individual components is required. The detailed design of all the considered components such as, half wave VSI, boost converter, buck converter, BLDC motors driving the centrifugal pump and the air blower are described as follows. Design of PV Array with Boost Converter The proposed SPV array model is designed with two PV modules connected in series. Each PV module has the maximum power voltage (Vmp) 17.8 V and current (Imp) 5.7 A. The PV system is operated at MPPT with the help of the DC-DC converter which is connected across the PV array using the P&O algorithm [7]. The DC-DC converter components such as series inductance (Lse), input capacitor (Cpv) and the DC link capacitor (Cdc) are to be estimated. To reduce the stress on the components, the switch, and converter are always operated in a continuous conduction mode [9]. Therefore for the converter design procedure, the continuous conduction mode is assumed. For designing the parameters of the boost converter, the maximum switch current needs to be calculated for the min-imum input voltage. Therefore, the duty cycle for achieving the maximum switch current is: The characteristics of the connected PV panels are given in Fig. 3(a) and Fig. 3(b). The PV panel characteristics are drawn with a constant temperature at 25 C; whereas the irradiance decreases, the output power decreases, which is shown in Fig. 3(a). Furthermore, as the same panels are exposed to various temperature conditions, the temperature increases, and the power delivery capability decreases as shown in Fig. 3(b). The shortcut current, open circuit voltage and maximum peak can be found in the same figures. Furthermore, the MPPT is obtained with the P&O algorithm and its flowchart is shown in Fig. 4. Perturb and observe is a linear technique used to track the maximum power point of a system source; in this method, the operating voltage value is regularly increased or decreased based on the direction w.r.t. current operating voltage location, in order to shift the voltage value towards the maximum power point voltage value. B. Design of BLDC-motors Two 3-phases, 4-pole BLDC motors were considered to drive both blower and pump loads. A second-order state-space model that produces a trapezoidal back EMF is used to represent the electrical and mechanical parts of the BLDC motor. The ratings of the BLDC that drives the blower is set to 0:15HP whereas the pump driving the BLDC motor rating is chosen based on the margin of solar irradiance up until when motors converts the DC input power fed from the DC-DC converter to the AC power that powers up the BLDC motor to drive the centrifugal pump and the blower fan coupled to their respective shafts. The important drawbacks of the proposed converter [1] are, not being able to handle the power sharing properly in the variable irradiance/dynamic conditions. Furthermore, the use of two three phase inverters makes the system so bulky and causes a reduction in its efficiency. Hence, a modified solar air cooling system is proposed with a half bridge voltage source converter. To ensure that the speed of the blower is constant, a stiff voltage is maintained at the end of the boost converter. The detailed operation is provided in Section III. DESIGN OF SOLAR AIR COOLER SYSTEM For development of an efficient and effective air cooler system that is capable to operate under various uncertain conditions, designing of all the individual components is required. The detailed design of all the considered components such as, half wave VSI, boost converter, buck converter, BLDC motors driving the centrifugal pump and the air blower are described as follows A. Design of PV Array with Boost Converter The proposed SPV array model is designed with two PV modules connected in series. Each PV module has the maximum power voltage (Vmp) 17.8 V and current (Imp) 5.7 A. The PV system is operated at MPPT with the help of the DC-DC converter which is connected across the PV array using the P&O algorithm [7]. The DC-DC converter components such as series inductance (Lse), input capacitor (Cpv) and the DC link capacitor (Cdc) are to be estimated. To reduce the stress on the components, the switch, and converter are always operated in a continuous conduction mode [9]. Therefore for the converter design procedure, the continuous conduction mode is assumed. For designing the parameters of the boost converter, the maximum switch current needs to be calculated for the min-imum input voltage. Therefore, the duty cycle for achieving the maximum switch current is: The characteristics of the connected PV panels are given in Fig. 3(a) and Fig. 3(b). The PV panel characteristics are drawn with a constant temperature at 25 C; whereas the irradiance decreases, the output power decreases, which is shown in Fig. 3(a). Furthermore, as the same panels are exposed to various temperature conditions, the temperature increases, and the power delivery capability decreases as shown in Fig. 3(b). The shortcut current, open circuit voltage and maximum peak can be found in the same figures. A. Electronic Commutation Based Control Scheme The 120-degree switching logic is one of the most common strategies to control the six-step VSI. In this method, each phase will be conducted two times in one full cycle with a span of 120 electrical degrees each time. Therefore, to have a balanced operation of the BLDC, the hall sensors are spatially placed at 120 degrees apart [8]. Based on the Hall sensor signals, 6 switching pulses are generated as shown in Table III. Furthermore, the MPPT is obtained with the P&O algorithm and its flowchart is shown in Fig. 4. Perturb and observe is a linear technique used to track the maximum power point of a system source; in this method, the operating voltage value is regularly increased or decreased based on the direction w.r.t. current operating voltage location, in order to shift the voltage value towards the maximum power point voltage value. B. Design of BLDC-motors Two 3-phases, 4-pole BLDC motors were considered to drive both blower and pump loads. A second-order state-space model that produces a trapezoidal back EMF is used to represent the electrical and mechanical parts of the BLDC motor The ratings of the BLDC that drives the blower is set to 0:15HP whereas the pump driving the BLDC motor rating is chosen based on the margin of solar irradiance up until when the blower is expected to operate at constant speed. As both the BLDC’s are powered by the same PV source, whenever there is a reduction in solar irradiance, the power output of the PV system is also reduced. This causes the blower fan to deviate from its constant speed. During this period, the power supplied to the pump BLDC is curtailed and the maximum possible power is provided to the blower fan BLDC so as to maintain its speed. The proposed system with the BLDC configuration is shown in Fig. 5. C. Operation of Proposed Converter The proposed boost converter with a half bridge configura-tion is shown in Fig. 5. The converter can be obtained by the various switching mechanisms. The switch which is placed in the boost converter can boost the input voltage to the required operating quantity. Thus the obtained voltage is given to the proposed converter drive (air blower). The output voltage of the boost converter is maintained by the capacitor Cdc. Thus, the obtained voltage can be given to the three phases of the BLDC through S1, S2 and S3. When S1 is turned ON, the voltage will appear across the Phase-A, which enables it to move into the active region. Some sample modes of operation in conjunction with the boost converter are given in Table II. For the three phase, the combinational logic can be obtained as shown in Fig. 4. However, with the usage of a half bridge inverter, the combinational logic circuit will be half and the complexity decreases drastically, at least to half. For the proposed air blower, a fixed speed is obtained by using the hysteresis control method. It compares the reference speed with the original speed of the BLDC Motor and generates a torque reference which when divided by the machine torque constant ‘kT ’, gives the current reference magnitude. This current reference magnitude is multiplied with the hall signals generated back EMF (efabc) pattern to obtain the current reference (ifabc). These current references are then compared with the actual current flowing in the stator through which an error signal is obtained, which is passed through a hysteresis controller that provides the pulses to trigger VSI switches resulting in a desired speed for the air blower fan But an exact estimation of the losses is not easy to obtain, so we use the DC voltage control loop in addition to the MPPT control which is enabled when the reaches its threshold. Now, due to the DC-link voltage controller, the voltage across the capacitor is maintained but this causes the PV to operate below MPP. Therefore, less power is extracted but this is not a problem, as the mechanical load required to be driven is also reduced. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION A 230 W solar air cooler model is designed as described in Section III. In this case, both the BLDC’s are considered to be of equal rating so that the air blower can be operated at a constant speed up to 500 W/m2 irradiance. In this scenario, the system behavior for the varying irradiance along with the initial dynamics of the BLDC motors are studied which is portrayed by Fig. 7. Initially the irradiance of the system is at 1000 W/m2 and the speed reference of the system is maintained constant at 1200 RPM during this case. the BLDC and the rest of the power is given to the BLDC. This is shown in Fig. 12(c). Furthermore, the boost converter voltage is reduced with the control, which in turn reduces the speed of the BLDC; however the system is maintained at the MPPT shown in Fig. 12(d). From the experimental analysis, it is clear that the system is maintained at the MPPT under variable irradiance conditions and delivers the power as per the requirements. A. Varibale Irridiance Condition The experimental system consists of two PV arrays, each with ratings of 100 W at 1000 W/m2 irradiance. These are connected in series with an open circuit voltage of 36 V. The fan blower is supplied with 90 V input DC voltage (which can vary up to 110 V DC) with a provided boost converter. The reason that the PV interconnection is needed for the boost converter is to enhance the speed horizon of the BLDC. This function of the boost converter is determined based on the MPPT algorithm. As the objective is to maintain the speed of the blower, the output voltage of the boost converter is maintained at constant and the speed is thereby maintained. The parameters of the pump and BLDC are provided in Table IV. VII. CONCLUSION A solar standalone air-cooling system using a pair of BLDC motors to drive the pump and air blower fan load coupled to their individual shafts is implemented in MATLAB/Simulink and then verified by conducting an experiment. The maximum power point (MPP) operation of the photovoltaic (PV) array obtained with a DC-DC boost converter which is adjoined with the DC voltage control so as to ensure safe operation during light load conditions and the DC-DC buck converter ensures the proper operation of the pump. The speed of the air blower system is maintained constant with the help of the pump load, although there is variation in the solar irradiance. Furthermore, the speed controller is used to vary the speed of the air blower as per the user requirements and ensuring its ability to extract maximum possible power from the PV system. Abstract: The effect of copper concentration on the performance of the catalytic reaction between silicon and methyl chloride was investigated using online gas chromatogram. The catalyst concentration greatly influences various aspects of the direct organosilane synthesis process, including the reaction rate, the selectivity, and the silicon conversion. The reaction activity and the silicon conversion increase as the catalyst concentration increases. However, the reaction selectivity decreases for the catalyst concentrations more than 9 wt.%. The cross-sections of deactivated contact mass particles were observed by optical microscopy and analyzed by scanning electron microscope combined with energy dispersive X-ray detector (SEM-EDX). The observations showed that a textured substance formed on the original flat surface of the silicon particles after deactivation with copper only in a shallow surface layer of the contact mass. This indicates that the copper diffusion is the rate limiting step which causes the reaction deactivation. Introduction The direct process of producing methylchlorosilane was first demonstrated by Rochow[1]. Rochow discovered that copper acts as catalyst with the normal reaction in the presence of copper given by: Cu Si 2CH Cl (CH ) SiCl by products, (s) 3 (g) 3 2 2(g) o r 'H 291.6 kJ/mol (1) This catalytic reaction provides an economic route for the production of dimethyldichlorosilane (M2). However, many side reactions take place, and the reaction products include a variety of compounds, such as methylchlorosilane (M1), trimethylchlorosilane (M3), methyldichlorosilane (MH), and other products with boiling points above 80ć which are referred to as residues[2]. In the direct process, silicon and copper in various forms, together with other promoters, constitute the socalled “contact mass” that reacts with methylchloride. The direct organosilane synthesis process has been the object of intensive research and development for over 60 years, yet there are many aspects of the reaction that are not well understood[3]. The main reason is the huge number of influencing parameters, such as the silicon impurities, the catalyst properties, and the addition of promoters with their many complex interactions[4-6]. Moreover, the fact that the silicon as a reactant interγγ acts chemically with the catalyst also complicates understanding of the reaction. The direct process is widely considered to be the only solid-catalyzed gassolid-solid process in the chemical industry[7]. While the catalyst of this reaction is added as different precursors containing copper, the real catalytic species is believed to be a copper-silicon alloy, i.e., the so-called Ș-phase, Cu3Si[8]. Following a period of gradual decline from 1970 to 1980, interest has again been developed in recent years leading to significant advances in a mechanistic understanding of catalysis and the discovery of new catalytic reactions involving silicon. Many papers and patents related to this process and using various modern analytical instruments are published every year[9,10]. However, there are few systematic studies of the effect of copper concentration on the reaction performance, including the reaction rate, the selectivity, and the silicon conversion. Such detailed information is needed in the organosilane industry, especially are in-depth understanding of the deactivation phenomenon. The purpose of this work is to study the effect of copper concentration and the deactivation caused by the contact mass. 1 Experimental 1.1 Materials The copper catalyst can be obtained from different sources containing copper. One effective way used in the present work is the reduction of CuCl in the reaction process[11]: CuCl Si SiCl Cu o 4 (2) The reduced copper then diffuses into the Si matrix to form discrete active centers, which are the Ș-phase. The material properties, especially of the silicon and the CuCl catalyst, are important factors in the synthesis reaction. The materials used in these experiments were provided by Jilin Chemical Corporation. Metallurgical silicon was used and its impurities are listed in Table 1. The CuCl catalyst, freshly prepared, has a purity of higher than 99% with apparent average particle diameters of 20 to 30 μm. Methylchloride was pretreated by filtering through 5A-zeolite followed by sulfuric acid. The purified methylchloride contains less than 50h 10 6 impurities which eliminated the effect of moisture and other impurities on the experimental results. Other promoters, such as zinc and tin, were used in suitable proportions as required. 1.2 Experimental apparatus The experimental apparatus shown in Fig. 1 was built to study the direct process. The main part of the apparatus was a stirred bed reactor, 30 mm in diameter and 200 mm in length. Methylchloride, from a highpressure tank was passed through a filter to remove impurities and then vaporized. A mass flow controller (MFC) measured and controlled the methylchloride flow rate fed into the reactor at the reactor bottom to react with the contact mass placed in the reactor prior to the experiment. After the reaction, the exhaust gas was discharged from the top of the reactor. The tail gas was purified through a filter to remove fine particles and then fed into a small fractional column. The crude silane mixture at the bottom of the fractional column was cooled and condensed to liquid and collected. Unreacted methylchloride is further condensed and collected. The gaseous reaction products were analyzed by online gas chromatogram (GC) to determine the 1, CH3Cl supply; 2, Zeolite; 3, Vitriol oil; 4, NaOH; 5, MFC; 6, Stirred bed reactor; 7, Online GC analysis; 8, Electromotor; 9, Crude silanes; 10, Evaporator; 11, Fractional column; 12, Vent reaction activity and the DDS/C ratios, i.e., the instantaneous selectivity[6]. The liquid silane was analyzed to determine the average product distribution. 1.3 Experimental procedures Although the direct process has been extensively investigated, reproducibility is still a key problem for experimental studies in laboratory scale reactor. The most important step for the synthesis reaction is the preparation of the contact mass. Small differences in the preparation of the contact mass can have large effects on the reaction performance. Therefore, the following standard procedure was adopted in all experiments: 1) The catalyst and promoters were added to the weighed silicon particles according to set proportions, and then uniformly mixed mechanically. 2) The mixture was put in a vacuum oven at 150ć for 10 h to remove the moisture. 3) The dry mixture was put into the reactor, and N2 at 200ć was introduced for 2 h at a flow rate below the minimum fluidized velocity to remove remaining moisture. 4) The reactor temperature was increased at a rate of 5ć/min until reaching the reaction temperature. This time point is referred to as the start time, t = 0. In the present study, all experiments were carried out at 310ć and 0.3 MPa. 5) Gaseous methylchloride was fed into the reactor and through the particle bed to start the synthesis reaction. The methylchloride conversion was kept low by using a small quantity of solid reagents, and thus the reaction heat was very small. Experiments were also carried out in a stirred bed reactor. The high velocities and complete mixing mean that the catalytic reaction is kinetically controlled under these conditions, the reaction temperature can be accurately controlled and the effect of external diffusion on the reaction can be ignored. The experimental accuracy was within r5% for reaction rate and r2% for the selectivity. 1.4 SEM-EDX analysis The morphology, the elemental composition, and the elemental distribution on the contact mass surfaces were investigated using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) combined with energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX). The SEM microscopy used a beam energy of 15 kV and the lateral resolution power of the EDX point analysis was about 2 Pm. The deactivated contact mass particles were sent for SEM-EDX analysis immediately after the catalytic reaction. 2 Results and Discussion A catalytic system consisting of Cu, Zn, and Sn that has excellent catalytic performance for the Rochow reaction[12] was used in the present study. The catalytic system was actually a mixture of CuCl, Zn, and Sn with a final Cu:Zn:Sn component mass ratio of 100:1:0.01 for all experiments. 2.1 Effect of copper concentration on the reaction rate The copper concentration, expressed as mass percent in the contact mass, significantly affects the reaction activity (expressed as grams of methychloride converted into silanes per kilogram of silicon at any time present in the reactor and per hour), as shown in Fig. 2. In general, increases in the copper concentration increase reaction activity since increases in the amount of copper increase the number of active sites which increase the reaction activity. At low copper concentrations, the activity curves have an induction period, a steady period, and a deactivated period. However, as the copper concentration is increased, the length of the steady period gradually decreases and even disappears at the higher copper concentrations. The initially steady activity is defined here as the reaction rate when the reaction just reaches the steady stage after the induction period. If the copper is well dispersed, i.e., there is sufficient silicon surface area, the initially steady activity shall be proportional to the copper content. However, as shown in Fig. 3, increases in the copper content do not result in uniform increases in the initial steady activity. This result is in accordance with the view of Joklik[13] and can be explained as an excessive amount of copper screening an increasing fraction of the reactive silicon/Ș-phase interfacial boundary on the silicon surface. Therefore, the catalyst must be well dispersed in practice. The effect of the copper concentration on the reaction selectivity is shown in Fig. 4. At low copper concentrations, the selectivity is about constant, but decreases rapidly when the copper concentration is greater than approximately 9 wt.%. The data suggests that the excessive copper used in production in facilities is not appropriate from an economic standpoint, though more copper does enhance reaction activity. 2.3 Microscopy and SEM-EDX analysis Deactivated particles, obtained after the experiment with a copper content of 6.4 wt.% were selected for further investigations of the catalytic reaction in the direct process. These particles were embedded in hot resin and polished to measure the cross-section of the deactivated particles after the resin solidified. Figures 5 and 6 show the microscope and SEM photos of the cross-section. The particle surface is quite rough and textured unlike the surfaces of fresh silicon particles which are relatively flat with moss-like shape while the surface of fresh silicon particles are relative flat. The EDX analysis shows that the copper is only within a shallow surface layer of the particle. Previous work[14] showed that as the reaction proceeds, more element copper is produced while the copper in the Ș-phase form is reduced, especially in the deactivated stage. Under the microscope, the deactivated particles have bright-red spots. Thus, the data indicate that the copper stays on the particle surfaces without diffusing into the Si in the deactivated stage. Voorhoeve and Vlugter[15] presented the reaction model shown in Fig. 7 to predict the point where deactivation of the direct reaction occurs. They assumed that the deactivation was due to the loss of free silicon particle surface area and calculated a conversion level at which activity loss took place. The calculated result was in agreement with experimental values. Some studies of the diffusion Cu in Si have shown that copper diffusion is relatively rapid so that the Ș-phase grows in the interfacial region[16]. Thus, Enrich et al.[10] modified the model in Fig. 7 to include the relatively high mobility of the Cu in Si matrix. As the reaction proceeds, the silicon particles are reduced and the elemental copper which is produced from Cu3Si after a reaction diffuses into the Si matrix to form new Cu3Si. The reaction rate will remain steady as long as the reactive centers are discrete and the surface diffusion is rate limiting. Once the active centers on the boundary are utilized, the diffusion across the active center boundary becomes the main reaction resistance instead of surface diffusion and deactivation occurs. The present work also uses this model to evaluate the silicon conversion at which deactivation occurs. When the copper catalyst concentration is relatively high, more active centers form on the silicon surface, resulting in a low silicon conversion at deactivation because of premature contact between these centers. However, contrary to previous conclusions, a low copper content also results in relatively low silicon Fig. 7 Reaction model presented by Voorhoeve and Vlugter.[15] a) Idealized structure of the Ș-phase (shaded area is the Șphase with silicon in between); b) Cross-section along surface A (in Fig. 7a); c) Same particles after 55% conversion ; d) Cross section along surface A (in Fig. 7c); a, Reaction of silicon with methylchloride; b, Surface diffusion of silicon; c, grain-boundary diffusion of silicon. conversion at deactivation, as shown by the experimental results for the 2.5 wt.% copper concentration. Data from the pictures in Figs. 5 and 6 were used to develop an improved model to reconcile this contradiction. The model assumes that the reaction occurs at the phase boundary, where the copper and silicon are in the Ș-phase. As the reaction proceeds, the boundary becomes more rough and the contact between the copper and the silicon surface deteriorates. The produced elemental copper gradually accumulates on the silicon surface with little diffusion into the Si matrix to form new active species. When the accumulation reaches some limit, deactivation occurs even though there is still free silicon surface. The deactivated models proposed by Voorhoeve and Vlugter[15] and Enrich et al.[10] can also be explained with this model. The copper can be divided into the Șphase and the free copper. Copper in the Ș-phase favors the reaction while the free copper hinders the reaction. Deactivation is partially due to the contact of discrete centers which is only a surface phenomenon, but the real cause is the copper diffusion limitation which reduces the contact area between the copper and the silicon. With a higher copper concentration, premature contact between active centers restricts diffusion of the copper into the unreacted silicon surface which deactivates the reaction. With a high copper concentration, more free copper accumulates on the surface which reduces the reaction selectivity even though more copper diffuses into the Si matrix to form the Ș-phase. Thus, despite the low silicon conversion at deactivation, the maximum silicon conversion increases as the catalyst concentration increases, as shown in Fig. 8. The understanding of the reaction physics leads to the following suggestions for practical production facilities. First, the copper concentration in industrial processes should be restricted to an appropriate range that is a function of silicon particles size. Secondly, frictional contact between the deactivated particles will increase the reaction because the free copper tapped in the textured surface will be removed to expose more silicon surface for reactions to form the Ș-phase. In addition, the catalyst can be designed into shapes that will enhance contact with the silicon. This should be a very interesting research field for further research into the Rochow direct process. 3 Conclusions The effect of copper concentration on the performance of the direct reaction between silicon and methylchloride was investigated using the online GC method. The catalyst concentration greatly influences various aspects of the direct reaction, including the reaction rate, the selectivity, and the silicon conversion. The reaction activity and the silicon conversion increase as the catalyst concentration increases. However, the reaction selectivity decreases for the catalyst concentrations which is more than 9 wt.%. The cross section of the deactivated contact mass particles observed by optical microscopy and analyzed by SEM combined with EDX shows that a rough textured surface formed on the original flat silicon particle surface after deactivation with the copper in only a shallow surface layer of the contact mass. These observations indicate that the copper diffusion is the rate limiting factor and the cause of reaction deactivation. Abstract: Theoretical study on the interferometric illumination of colloid-sphere monolayers (IICSM) is presented to produce complex plasmonic structures consisting of wavelengthscaled periodic arrays of nano-objects with arbitrary array symmetry and controllable nanoscaled substructure. The IICSM method is based on illumination of hexagonal colloidsphere monolayers by interference patterns synchronized with sphere arrays along arbitrary preselected crystallographic directions. This nanokaleidoscope method enables tuning four structure parameters independently: the symmetry and characteristic periodicity of the interference pattern might be varied by the number, wavelength, and angle of incidence of the interfering beams; the distance between the nano-objects is controllable by the relative orientation of the interference pattern with respect to the hexagonal lattice of colloid spheres; the size of individual nano-objects is determined by the colloid-spheres’ diameter and by the light wavelength; and the substructure size-parameter sensitively depends on the polarization state and can be tuned with the nano-object size simultaneously. Finite element method is applied to demonstrate the capabilities of IICSM based on gold colloid spheres and the impact of the resulted complex plasmonic patterns on spectral properties of thin gold films. The possibility of realizing spectral engineering with predesigned rectangular arrays of hole doublets that may be produced uniquely by IICSM is shown. 1. Introduction In last decades, significant progress has been made in miniaturization of optoelectronic devices due to advancements in material science. The optical wavelength-scaled periodic structures, e.g., photonic crystals [1], and nanoscaled metal patterns, e.g., nanoplasmonic materials [2], are at the heart of these devices. Periodic arrays of nano-objects may offer novel solutions for many scientific and technological problems. The plasmonic spectral engineering concept is based on the sensitivity of complex noble metal structures’ spectra to the geometry of individual nano-objects and their arrays. Designing controlled complex plasmonic structures is likely to provide revolutionary methods for application areas such as biosensing [3]. High-resolution features in arbitrary pattern can be generated by classical scanning beam lithography methods, but application of these techniques is limited caused by the related high costs and slow processing rate [4]. In practical applications, there is a great demand for low-cost and rapid technologies. Various laser-based material treatment methods with widely tunable experimental parameters are available in science and industry. In all laser-based lithography techniques, the permanent modification of the surface structure originates from material rearrangement and/or removal (ablation) and/or photochemical modification of properly selected target materials, e.g., photoresists. The laser-based interferometric methods are parallel processes, thus making it possible to pattern large-scale areas at once. Wavelength-scaled periodic structures may be fabricated on macroscopic substrates, applying mirrors to realize two-beam interference [5]. Our previous studies have shown that submicrometer periodic metal stripes of nanograins can be produced via twobeam interference [6]. Caused by the inherent diffraction limit in all laser-based techniques, generation of nanoscaled structures is realizable only via hardly controllable self-organized processes [7]. Colloid sphere lithography is a suitable technique to produce subwavelength objects, and is widely applied to fabricate periodic nanoparticle arrays with precisely controlled shape, size, and interparticle spacing on large areas [8]. The laser-based colloid-sphere lithography is capable of overcoming the diffraction limit [9], [10]. The strong near-field enhancement achievable, when dielectric colloid spheres are illuminated with coherent light, is determined by the spheres’ diameter and by the wavelength [11]. In case of perpendicular incidence, the intensity distribution is determined by optical resonances on spheres larger than the wavelength and by near-field effects under spheres with subwavelength diameter [12]. Applying oblique incident beams it is possible to fabricate controllable substructures inside the treated areas with versatile symmetry, when the diameter-to-wavelength ratio is appropriate [13], [14]. It was also demonstrated that silica colloid-sphere masks can be used to produce hole arrays as a first step, and these templates make it possible to produce metal nanodot arrays via liftoff process [15]. The effect of metal spheres has been less investigated until now but is promising due to the enormous field enhancement accompanying the localized surface plasmon resonance, which might be tuned by the diameter and by the dielectric properties of media around them [16]. In the presence of substrates, the largest enhancement was observed, when metal colloid spheres were arrayed on metal surfaces [17], [18]. The near-field confinement under metal spheres is more strongly dependent on the polarization and angle of incidence than on dielectric spheres, which makes widely tunable surface plasmon assisted nanopatterning possible [19]. The advantage of colloid-sphere-based lithographic methods is the very high uniformity of the subwavelength objects, while the commensurability and fixed ratio of the object size and the interobject distance inherently limit the degrees of freedom available in geometrical parameters’ variation. The hexagonal arrangement in closely packed sphere monolayers determines the symmetry properties of the structures that can be produced and therefore limits the geometrydependent spectral properties; however, engineering of these properties is crucial in different application areas. There are tremendous efforts in recent colloid-sphere lithography to overcome these barriers, among them are modification of the spheres’ assembly process and application of templates to predefine their deposition [20]. These techniques are multistep chemical procedures, which require special experimental infrastructure. Development of dominantly optical methods that necessitate the lowest number of consecutive steps and extensively available apparatus is at the core of recent colloid-sphere-based applied nanotechnology. We propose the novel interferometric illumination of colloid-sphere monolayers (IICSM), the method of which has a potential to generate complex, e.g., plasmonic structures consisting of wavelength-scaled arrays of arbitrary uniform nanofeatures, as holes or particles, on large areas at low costs. Our further purpose is to show that the novel nanofabrication method based on interferometric illumination of gold colloid-sphere monolayers is capable of tuning the dominant micro- and nanoscopic parameters independently, which determine the spectral properties of complex plasmonic structures. The final purpose of this paper is to show an example of spectral engineering, which is realized via appropriately predesigned complex plasmonic structures in thin gold films. 2. IICSM: Method and Capabilities In IICSM, an intensity distribution with appropriate symmetry and periodicity is applied to illuminate arbitrary preselected arrays of colloid spheres in a hexagonal monolayer. Illumination by an interference pattern completely substitutes the chemical pretreatment procedures or application of templates that might result in nonhexagonal colloid-sphere arrays via multistep processes. However, experimental implementation of the IICSM method requires the synchronization of an interference pattern with a colloid-sphere monolayer, i.e., perfectness of both the intensity distribution and the monolayer is indispensable. IICSM inherits the sensitivity of the colloid-sphere lithography to crystallographic defects, e.g., to polydispersity of the spheres and to dislocations in the monolayer. These defects limit the long-range order in contempt of perfect periodic modulation originating from homogeneous interfering beams. When the monolayer is perfect, an optimized relative positioning allows to maintain the periodic intensity modulation and near-field enhancement simultaneously, thus making possible the near-field concentration of the periodic intensity distribution (see Fig. 1). IICSM is a parallel technique, as all macroscopic surface parts might be patterned at once, where the periodic intensity distribution matches colloid-sphere arrays in a perfect monolayer. The method combines the advantages of both integrated techniques: the symmetry properties and periodicity of the interference modulation are transmitted to a wavelength-scaled periodic pattern, while the intensity concentration in the near-field of colloid spheres occurs only within areas considerably smaller than the wavelength. In addition to the available resolution, an important figure of merit in lithography is the available degree of freedom, which specifies the number of independently tunable geometrical parameters. First, we will present how the geometrical size parameters can be controlled in IICSM and show how this novel integrated method combines all capabilities of the interference and colloid-sphere lithography, resulting uniquely in four degrees of freedom. In interference lithography the number, wavelength and incidence angle of the interfering beams determine the symmetry properties of the fabricated patterns. Two-beam interference results in linear arrays, while multiple-beam interference is capable of producing complex patterns with arbitrary symmetry. The first characteristic geometrical size parameter in IICSM is the mesoscopic p periodicity (100 nm–1000 nm) of the nano-object array tunable by the   wavelength and   angle of incidence, in accordance with interference lithography methods. The extension of the area, where nano-objects might be fabricated inside interference patterns, is synchronously controllable by the wavelength and angle of incidence, and is influenced by the power density. It is possible to define and control a secondary pattern by tuning these parameters in experiments. In IICSM, the interference pattern is wavelength-scaled, as in interference lithography, but the resulted pattern has a fine nanoscaled structure due to the concentration of the EM-field by colloid spheres. The second nanoscaled geometrical size parameter is the t interobject distance (10 nm–1000 nm), which is commensurate with the d distance between the centers of the illuminated colloid spheres. This degree of freedom appears as a result of interference and colloid lithography integration. The interobject distance depends on the relative orientation of the interference pattern with respect to the colloid-sphere monolayer. As the relative orientation might be varied semicontinuously, there are countable infinite number of values that t might take on (see Fig. 1). Under the same experimental conditions, i.e., applying light with the same wavelength and colloid spheres with the same material and diameter, various arrays might be fabricated simply by varying the illumination directions. The relative orientation of the interference pattern with respect to the monolayer and the angle of incidence has to be tuned together. Although IICSM might be realized by the arbitrary number of interfering beams, in this paper, two significantly different geometries are introduced for the case of two-beam interference, which result in the smallest possible t interobject distance. These two representative examples are nominated as geometry-I and geometry-II, and the corresponding quantities are indicated by roman numbers I and II in Fig. 1 and throughout this paper. All directions are measured with respect to the array of closely packed colloid spheres, which is the (1, 0, 0) direction in 2-D hexagonal lattices of colloid spheres. In case of two-beam interference, when the angle between the (1, 0, 0) direction and the plane of incidence is i, the interference pattern is oriented at i ¼ 90   i. The direction of E-field oscillation is specified by   s=p i angle, i.e., s- and p-polarized light illumination is qualified by  s I ¼ 0 and   p I ¼ 90 in geometry-I (see Fig. 1, highlighted in blue), and  s II ¼ 30 and   p II ¼ 60 in geometry-II (Fig. 1, highlighted in red). When the interference pattern is parallel to the (1, 0, 0) direction of hexagonally arrayed colloid spheres, i.e., I ¼ 0, the interobject distance along the interference pattern equals with the spheres distance tI ¼ d. The interarray distance, i.e., the periodicity, is pn I ¼ n ffiffiffi 3 p =2 d, which is larger than the distance of nano-objects in case of homogeneous illumination (HI), always when n 9 1. The angles of incidence appropriate to generate interference pattern with periodicities corresponding to different values of n in geometry-I are  n I ¼ arcsin   n ffiffiffi 3 p d  : (1) When the interference pattern is rotated with respect to the array of closely packed colloid spheres by II ¼ 30, the produced nanofeatures are more closely packed in between arrays. The interobject distance is larger than the sphere diameter tII ¼ ffiffiffi 3 p d, while the interarray distance, i.e., the periodicity, is proportional to the half-diameter as pn II ¼ n d=2, which is larger than the distance between nano-objects in case of HI, always when n 9 1. The angles of incidence appropriate to generate interference pattern with periodicities corresponding to different values of n in geometry-II are  n II ¼ arcsin   n d  : (2) When n is an even number, the periodicity is proportional with the distance of ffiffiffi 3 p d in geometry-I and to the d diameter in geometry-II. The advantage of cases corresponding to even n numbers is that the resulted nano-objects are aligned in linear arrays, which are perpendicular to the interference pattern, while odd n numbers cause that the nano-objects are shifted with respect to each other alongside neighboring interference maxima. The only barrier in IICSM is that the   angle of incidence is limited by the shade effect of neighboring spheres and the maximal value is 60 when they are dielectric, while the incidence angle may reach even 90 in case of metal spheres. Due to these capabilities, IICSM might be considered as a Bnanokaleidoscope[ method, as the diffraction on the produced complex patterns might be controlled by the i=i rotation angles. IICSM is suitable to illuminate both dielectric and metal colloid spheres; however, monolayer preparation from metal spheres is a scientific challenge also with techniques recently available in colloid-sphere lithography. An important advantage of IICSM based on metal spheres, which is studied in detail in this paper, is that the interparticle coupling might be optimized synchronously, since the distance between the particles illuminated by interference maxima is also tuned by   angle of incidence, when the tilting is varied, as we will show in Section 4. The third geometrical size parameter is the nanoscopic a diameter of the treated areas (1–10 nm, 100 nm), which is commensurate with the FWHM of the intensity distribution under colloid spheres. This FWHM is determined by the spheres d diameter and by the   wavelength, while the resulted a diameter might be also influenced by the applied power density. The related degree of freedom originates from colloid-sphere lithography, the forward step in IICSM is that the nanoscaled features are arrayed along the periodic interference pattern. In case of polarized light illumination, a characteristic substructure appears, which might be qualified by a fourth d0 substructure size parameter. Caused by symmetry reasons, this substructure is aligned alongside the interference pattern in case of s-polarized light, while p-polarized light illumination results in a substructure aligned perpendicularly to the interference pattern. The d0 size parameter is tunable simultaneously with a, by varying the colloid-sphere diameter, wavelength, and power density. Appearance of arrays composed of these substructures is a synergic effect, as their properties are predetermined by the complete experimental parameter setting, i.e., the corresponding degree of freedom is not completely independent. Although the type of polarization has analogous effect in standard colloid-sphere lithography, IICSM uniquely provides possibility of choosing different relative orientations between the substructure and interference pattern. In commercial laser-based colloid-sphere lithography, the light illumination results in exploitation of all spheres, while in IICSM, the spheres illuminated by beams with power density below their damage threshold have to be removed in a single posttreatment step. The selective removal might be promoted by an appropriate chemical layer, but such interfacial layer is not required in all colloidsphere and substrate systems. IICSM method can be used directly to produce concave objects, e.g., holes in different substrates or thin films, and these concave objects might be converted into nanoparticles via standard liftoff lithography. We have selected metallic film covered substrates for the presentation of IICSM capabilities, although the method is applicable to fabricate various kinds of targets. The most significant spectral effects originating from plasmonic phenomena determined by the surface structure of metal films or metal substrates are well described in the literature. When the propagating EM-modes’ wavelength is commensurate with the periodicity of the nano-object array, extrema appear on the absorptance and transmittance spectra of nanoparticle and hole arrays [21], [22]. With IICSM, metal films might be directly structured by illuminating colloid-sphere monolayers arrayed on the top of them; thus, applying this method, it becomes possible to design complex patterns with extraordinary transmission at arbitrarily predefined wavelengths [23]. Moreover, due to the four degrees of freedom, IICSM might be the most convenient method to generate complex arrays of nano-objects, i.e., predesigned plasmonic nanoclusters that seem to be the most promising in several application areas [24]. 3. FEM to Demonstrate IICSM We used finite-element method (FEM) to determine the EM-field distribution under gold colloid spheres arrayed on 45-nm-thick gold film coated NBK7 substrates. The computations were performed by applying the radio frequency module of Comsol Multiphysics software package (COMSOL AB). Special 3-D models were created, which make it possible to illuminate colloid-sphere monolayers with theoretically infinite lateral extension by arbitrary number of beams with arbitrary wavelength, polarization state, and angle of incidence. On the vertical sides of the investigated unit cells, periodic boundary conditions were applied, and the illuminating beams were defined as plane waves emanating from a source side of a boundary pair. As a first step, the intensity distribution under sparse gold colloid-sphere monolayers was computed for the case of HI [see Figs. 2(a) and (d) and 3(a)]. Single s-polarized monochromatic plane wave was incident perpendicularly to one hexagonal unit cell of sparse monolayers. These sparse monolayers consist of nontouching hexagonally arrayed colloid spheres, similarly to real metal sphere monolayers. The sphere diameters were reduced by such an extent, which enables that the intensity attainable under the spheres with d0 diameter exceeds the intensity reached at the closest points of spheres in the central plane of the monolayer. As a second step, the angles of incidence appropriate to result in interference patterns with desired periodicities were theoretically determined for specific cases of geometry-I and geometry-II in IICSM [see Figs. 2(b), (c), (e), (f) and 3(b) and (c)]. Two s-polarized plane waves were incident at   and    angles onto preselected areas of sparse gold colloid-sphere monolayers commensurate with unit cells of the desired rectangular array, and the interference pattern was synchronized with the colloid-sphere monolayers by setting the initial phases appropriately. In IICSM, the near-field is not a simple convolution of a plane wave or laterally periodic distribution and the near-field pattern of a hexagonal colloid-sphere monolayer. The interfering beams are obliquely incident, which results in unique near-field characteristics under the colloid spheres. The normalized (time-averaged) E-field was investigated to determine the near-field enhancement on the substrate surface under the colloid spheres and to predict the expected a nano-object size based on the FWHM and the d0 substructure parameter based on the splitting of the lateral intensity distribution. The characteristic parameters, such as near-field enhancement, FWHM, splitting in intensity distribution, determined for the case of HI of monolayers, and applying different parameter settings in geometry-I and in geometry-II in IICSM, are compared in Fig. 4. Finally, the spectral effects of hole arrays in thin gold films consisting of standalone holes and hole doublets in hexagonal pattern, which might be produced by HI, and in rectangular pattern, which can be exclusively fabricated by IICSM, were analyzed. The purpose of this comparative spectral study was to prove that fine spectral tuning might be realized by complex hole arrays produced via IICSM due to geometry-dependent nanoplasmonic effects (see Fig. 5). The wavelength was tuned from 300 to 900 nm in these spectral studies, and the wavelengthdependent optical parameters were taken into account by including Cauchy formulas of the dielectrics, and by loading tabulated data sets of the dielectric parameters for gold. 4. Results and Discussions Figs. 2 and 3 indicate the effect of gold colloid-sphere monolayers on the intensity distribution at the surface of 45-nm-thick gold film coated substrates in case of illumination by s-polarized light. These computation results prove that the subwavelength gold spheres can act as efficient nanolenses capable of light concentration in the near-field, when they are arrayed in monolayers. First, the results of HI are presented to characterize the reference structures attainable via standard colloidsphere lithography, and then, the patterns that might be exclusively fabricated via IICSM are introduced. The resulting features are discussed in detail to uncover the relationship between the illumination conditions and the expected hole pattern characteristics. 4.1. Effect of HI Figs. 2(a) and (d) and 3(a) present the reference cases, i.e., when the monolayers made of 225-nmdiameter spheres arrayed at a 250-nm distance and monolayer of 90-nm-diameter colloid spheres positioned at 100-nm distance are illuminated by homogeneous perpendicularly incident 532-nm wavelength light. As a result of illumination by linearly polarized light, split intensity distribution is observable along the E-field oscillation direction. According to this, a substructure manifesting itself in hole doublets may develop under each of the colloid spheres. The intensity distribution under the colloid-sphere monolayer is influenced by  I angle between the (1, 0, 0) orientation and the E-field oscillation direction already in case of illumination by perpendicularly incident homogeneous beam [see Fig. 2(a)–(d)]. The E-field oscillates along spheres most closely packed at tI ¼ d inside arrays, according to  s I ¼ 0 in Fig. 2(a), while the E-field oscillation is along arrays of spheres positioned at a distance of tII ¼ ffiffiffi 3 p d in Figs. 2(d) and 3(a), according to  s II ¼ 30. The large-scale intensity distribution has hexagonal symmetry in both geometries, but the complex patterns consist of a hexagonal array of doublets possessing split along different relative E-field oscillation directions with respect to the monolayer. 4.2. Effect of IICSM Light illumination by two interfering beams results in a periodic intensity modulation determined by the wavelength and incidence angle. As s-polarized light was applied in this paper, the relative orientations of the E-field oscillation with respect to the (1, 0, 0) direction were  s I ¼ 0 in geometry-I [see Fig. 2(b) and (c)] and  s II ¼ 30 in geometry-II [see Figs. 2(e) and (f) and 3(b) and (c)]. First, it was analyzed how the i relative orientation between the monolayer and the interference pattern influence the intensity distribution under 225-nm-diameter gold colloid spheres, when their monolayer is arrayed on 45-nm-thick gold film covered NBK7 substrate. The monolayers were illuminated by two interfering 532-nm wavelength light beams in geometry-I and in geometry-II [see Fig. 2(b) and (c) to (e) and (f)]. The tuning of the p periodicity by the angle of incidence is also shown, when s-polarized light is incident at polar angles corresponding to n ¼ 2 and n ¼ 3 cases [see Fig. 2(b) and (c)] in geometry-I; while n ¼ 4 and n ¼ 6 cases are presented for geometry-II [see Fig. 2(e) and (f)]. When we illuminate the hexagonal colloid-sphere monolayer in geometry-I and geometry-II, the different arrangement of colloid spheres aligning at tI ¼ d and tII ¼ ffiffiffi 3 p d distances under the interference maxima with finite width results in different complex patterns formation. In geometry-I, the intensity distribution under the spheres indicates doublets along closely packed sphere arrays, as both the interference maxima and the E-field oscillation direction are parallel to the (1, 0, 0) orientation ðI ¼  s I ¼ 0Þ. The comparison of the near-field pictures taken about 433-nm periodic pattern appearing at  2 I ¼ 37:9 incidence angle corresponding to n ¼ 2 [see Fig. 2(b)] and about the 649.5-nm periodic pattern developing at  3 I ¼ 24:2 incidence angle corresponding to n ¼ 3 [see Fig. 2(c)] indicates that smaller incidence angle results in nano-object array with larger p period. Moreover, in case of smaller incidence angle, a secondary pattern develops due to the EM-field enhancement along two neighboring sphere arrays caused by the finite extension of the interference maxima. As a result of synergic effects in geometry-I, a complex pattern of Bnanobutterflies[ with wings opened along the E-field oscillation direction appears along incidence-angle-dependent number of linear arrays of spheres most closely packed in the sparse monolayer [see Fig. 2(a)–(c)]. When a monolayer of 225-nm gold spheres is illuminated by s-polarized light in geometry-II, significantly different complex pattern appears. The p periodicity might be tuned by the incidence angle, e.g., 500-nm periodic pattern develops at  4 II ¼ 32:1 corresponding to n ¼ 4 [see Fig. 2(e)], and 750-nm periodic pattern appears at  6 II ¼ 20:8 corresponding to n ¼ 6 [see Fig. 2(f)]. The intensity modulation with finite extension results in a secondary pattern also in geometry-II, and by decreasing the angle of incidence, the extension of this secondary pattern increases simultaneously with the increase of the periodicity, similarly to the observation in geometry-I [see Fig. 2(b) to (e) and (c) to (f)]. The characteristics of the resulted complex pattern is different, caused by the II ¼ 30 relative orientation of the interference pattern and  s II ¼ 30 E-field oscillation with respect to (1, 0, 0) direction. The synergic effects result in vertical doublets arrayed along pentagons and heptagons composing Bnanoflowers[ in geometry-II. In addition to this, the secondary pattern is more pronounced at similar incidence angles than in case of geometry-I, as a result patterning might be performed over a more extended area and results in more complex nanoclusters in geometry-II. Fig. 3(a)–(c) shows the effect of 90-nm diameter gold colloid spheres on the intensity distribution at the substrate surface. The role of colloid spheres’ size was analyzed by illuminating 225-nm and 90-nm diameter spheres by light having a wavelength of 532 nm. Illumination processes by homogeneous beam and by interference patterns of two beams, incident at   angles corresponding to n ¼ 6 and n ¼ 8 cases in geometry-II, were inspected. The comparison of Fig. 2(f) to Fig. 3(b) and Fig. 2(d) to Fig. 3(a) shows that all of p, t, a, and d0 geometrical parameters might be tuned simultaneously by varying the colloid spheres’ diameter. Smaller colloid spheres result in smaller size parameters, and the secondary pattern develops on a relatively larger area at the same n values (see Figs. 3 and 4). 4.3. Quantitative Near-Field Study A quantitative near-field study was performed to inspect the effect of the IICSM geometry and sphere diameter [see Fig. 4(a)–(c)]. The comparative study of the resulted near-field shows the advantages of IICSM, namely, applying two interfering beams, the smaller incidence angles result in increased periodicity, which is accompanied by less efficient coupling between the gold particles. As a result, the enhancement is larger in IICSM than in case of HI of colloid-sphere monolayers. The FWHM of the intensity maxima is commensurate in all cases, i.e., when monolayers are illuminated by performing HI and IICSM. The degree of splitting in intensity distribution, i.e., the 4.4. Application of Complex Plasmonic Structures Produced by HI and Via IICSM for Spectral Engineering The geometrical parameters of the holes developing as a result of HI and IICSM are extrapolated based on the time-averaged E-field distribution at the colloid spheres’ and gold film interface in this paper. The material response, i.e., the heat distribution inside the illuminated areas, and the resulted geometry of the produced holes are strongly influenced by the power density applied in experiments. The approximation of the hole diameter by the FWHM, and the distance between individual holes by the splitting in intensity distribution is based on the theoretical proof of similar resistive heating distribution and on the experimental evidence of structure parameters’ sensitivity to the power density. In our present theoretical spectral study, the shape, size, and quality of the nano-objects is supposed to be uniform, and the secondary pattern is neglected. These characteristic properties might be attained in experimental realization, when both the monolayer and the intensity modulation are prefect, they are synchronized, and the power density is tuned appropriately. In this section, we present the spectral effects of reference patterns, which might be produced by standard colloid-sphere lithography via HI with unpolarized and polarized light. These reference patterns are the simple hexagonal array of single cylindrical holes and the more complex hexagonal array of overlapping hole doublets. These reference patterns are compared with corresponding simple and complex rectangular arrays of single holes and hole doublets. The spectral effect of complex rectangular pattern of hole doublets that can be produced by s-polarized IICSM were inspected, since uniform hole doublets appear also in the secondary pattern due to the parallelism E-field oscillation to the interference maxima. The spectral effect of nanohole arrays developing as a result of 532-nm wavelength illumination of sparse monolayers of 90-nm diameter gold colloid spheres was analyzed. The studied unit cells are indicated by red rectangles on the schematic drawings about the sparse colloid-sphere monolayers [see Fig. 5(a) and (b)]. In Fig. 5(a), size parameters of d ¼ 100 nm and t ¼ ffiffiffi 3 p d ¼ 173 nm reveal to the distance of colloid spheres in a hexagonal lattice [see Fig. 3(a)], while in Fig. 5(b), size parameters of p ¼ 300 nm and t ¼ ffiffiffi 3 p d ¼ 173 nm are in accordance with periodicities in geometry-II [see Fig. 3(b)]. The diameter of standalone holes (gray areas) is a ¼ 12:8 nm according to the FWHM of the intensity distribution, and the distance between the centers of overlapping cylindrical holes (gray and blue areas) is d0 ¼ 8:9 nm corresponding to the computed splitting [see Fig. 4(c)]. First, the transmittance and absorptance of hexagonal hole arrays [see Fig. 5(c) and (e)], which can be produced by homogeneous light illumination [see Figs. 3(a) and 5(a)] were compared with spectra of rectangular hole arrays [see Fig. 5(d) and (f)], which can be fabricated by IICSM in geometry-II [see Figs. 3(b) and 5(b)]. In all cases, the presented data are corrected by subtracting the signal of a continuous gold film with analogous thickness. In addition to this, the transmittance spectra were normalized according to the hole areaVunit cell area ratio. The effect of simple arrays containing standalone cylindrical holes was compared with the effect of more complex arrays containing hole doublets [see Fig. 5(c)–(f), open to closed symbols]. The transmittance and absorptance were computed for all of hole arrays first in asymmetric environment, when air medium is above and inside the holes. Then, same arrays were studied in symmetric medium, when NBK7 surrounds the patterned Au film and fills the holes too [see Fig. 5(c) and (d): green to blue; Fig. 5(e) and (f): orange to red]. Spectral studies were performed for p-polarized light illumination of all hole arrays in a configuration, where the E-field oscillation is perpendicular to the long axis of hole doublets ( ¼ 90 azimuthal orientation). In addition to this, the hole doublets in symmetric environment were analyzed for the case of E-field oscillation parallel to their long axis ( ¼ 0 azimuthal orientation) [Fig. 5(c) and (d): closed navy; Fig. 5(e) and (f): closed wine symbols). Due to the small diameter of individual holes, small transmittance and absorptance peaks appear in the neighborhood of gold turnaround frequency in all investigated cases [see Fig. 5(c)–(f)]. All maxima observed in absorptance spectra are linked to well-defined transmittance maxima indicating that resonant modes are excited in these spectral intervals [see Fig. 5(c) to (e) and (d) to (f)] [25]. The extrema depend on the array geometry and on the surrounding media [26]. All extrema are slightly red-shifted in rectangular arrays with respect to the extrema on hexagonal arrays consisting of analogous features in same environment [see Fig. 5(c) and (e) to (d) and (f)], in accordance with the sensitivity of hole arrays’ resonance to the periodicity [22]. At the same time, the computation results reveal to strong influence of individual nano-objects shape on the spectral response of arrays [see Fig. 5(c)–(f)]. The transmittance and absorptance characteristics indicate that doublets of nanofeatures, originating from the inherent splitting in intensity distribution in IICSM, exhibit unique spectral properties. Namely, the hole doublets result in a forward shift and in an additional transmittance and absorptance enhancement, when the E-field oscillation is perpendicular to their long axes, i.e., at  ¼ 90 azimuthal orientation (see Fig. 5; closed to open symbols). Similar E-field orientation preference was observed on spectra of elliptical holes in the literature [27], [28]. The switching from asymmetric to symmetric environment promotes the absorptance and E-field transportation via coupled modes in both hole arrays and results in forward-shifted maxima due to index matching at the opposite metal–dielectric interfaces according to the literature [26], [29], [30]. The corrected normalized transmittance values are larger than unity in both geometries, only when arrays of hole doublets are illuminated by light with E-field oscillation perpendicular to their long axis, in symmetric environment [see Fig. 5(c) and (d)]. Interestingly, minima (534 nm and 540 nm) appear on the transmittance before pronounced maxima (600 nm and 618 nm) in both arrays. Comparison of the schematic drawings shows that both arrays possess the t periodicity, which is commensurate with half-wavelength of the photonic modes at the minima, appearing at spectral positions coincident within the resolution of computations in the two types of arrays. The coincidence of minima reveals to analogous Bragg diffraction on hexagonal and rectangular arrays of hole doublets elongated perpendicularly to the E-field oscillation. The peculiarity of the IICSM generated array is that the plasmon wavelength is equal to the p ¼ 300 nm periodicity in the rectangular unit cell at the transmittance minimum. The fulfillment of the Rayleigh condition explains the difference between minimal transmissions values observable in the investigated two geometries, which manifests itself in more strongly suppressed correctednormalized transmittance in case of rectangular array [see Fig. 5(c) to (d)]. The pronounced transmittance maxima are observable following these minima (600 nm and 618 nm), i.e., in both complex structures in spectral intervals, where the plasmon wavelengths are larger than the characteristic periodicities. The forward shift of the transmittance maxima with respect to the spectral position, where the Rayleigh condition is fulfilled for propagating plasmonic modes, is explained by phase changes accompanying launching on hole arrays in the literature [29], [30]. Peculiarity of the rectangular array is the inflection point on the transmittance peak and the corresponding double Fano-like absorptance peak [31]. When the E-field oscillation is parallel to the long axis of doublets ð ¼ 0Þ, no minima are observable, on the contrary only single maxima appear. Comparing the transmittance values in case of two different polarization directions at the minima observed at  ¼ 90, i.e., at spectral positions indicated by symbols with embedded numbers 1 and 3 in Fig. 5(c) and (d), we can conclude that larger polarization sensitivity is achievable in case of rectangular array. The minima appearing on the corrected transmittance of the hole doublets in symmetric environment at  ¼ 90 indicates that the transmittance on both arrays approximates the transmittance of the continuous film. The near-field investigation revealed considerable E-field intensity on the doublets also at these minima [see Fig. 5(a) and (b), first images]. However, the near-field intensity is significantly higher on the hole doublets at the maxima, in accordance with the observed enhanced transmittance and absorptance [see Fig. 5(a) and (b), second images]. This is due to the reinforcement of the external field via induced dipole moments on elongated doublets, when the E-field oscillation orientation is perpendicular to their long axis. The near-field intensity is considerably smaller in case of  ¼ 0 at the spectral positions corresponding to minima observed on the transmittance at  ¼ 90 azimuthal orientation [see Fig. 5(a) and (b), last images]. This is caused by the smaller local field enhancement available on elongated doublets, when the E-field oscillates along their longer axis [27]. The differences in spectral position of absorptance, transmittance, and near-field maxima are in agreement with the literature [32]. Further general characteristic of rectangular and hexagonal arrays is that, in order to maximize the transmission, it is advantageous to apply hole doublets instead of standalone holes and to apply symmetric surrounding media instead of asymmetric environment. Moreover, these observations prove that predesigned rectangular hole arrays consisting of tiny nanohole doublets prepared by IICSM make possible spectral engineering with enhanced polarization sensitivity due to the involvement of plasmonic phenomena into the EM-field transportation. 5. Conclusion In conclusion, we have shown that IICSM, as the integration of interferometric illumination and colloid-sphere lithography, makes possible the near-field concentration of periodic intensity distributions. We have demonstrated that the number of geometrical parameters independently variable with IICSM based on two-beam interference is four in 2-D, depending on the polarizationrelated substructures’ dominance. According to our knowledge, IICSM is the first parallel method, which makes this high degree of freedom available in complex nanopatterns’ fabrication. We have demonstrated that complex patterns of nanofeatures might be produced via IICSM applying polarized light. This paper proves that the presence of these complex structures has a significant effect on the absorption and transmission spectra of the treated materials, already in case of nanoscaled incorporated features. Moreover, we have shown that spectral engineering is possible with tunable polarization sensitivity via these complex plasmonic patterns. Further studies are in progress to produce plasmonic nanoclusters by colloid-sphere-based photolithography techniques, following the method of IICSM. Selection of appropriate material and experimental parameters in IICSM will enable production of artificial 2-D or even 3-D complex structures with predesigned spectral characteristics or modify the spectral properties of common materials. Novel types of plasmonic and metamaterials might be fabricated, and very high density data storage will be possible based on IICSM, while the tunable coupled resonances on arrays of nanometric metallic nano-objects will provide more efficient tools for biomolecular analyses. Abstract—Semiconductor quantum dots (QDs) are the subject of intensive research worldwide due to a number of novel properties, which make them of interest for both fundamental science and technological applications. QDs are of particular interest for solar cell applications due to their ability to increase efficiency via the generation of multiexcitons from a single photon. The efficiency of multiexciton generation (MEG) in colloidal QDs is determined by the competition between MEG and other hot electron-cooling processes. Core/shell QDs with type-II band alignment offers extra degrees of freedom in mediating both the optical dipoles and the Coulomb interaction between charges in such structures for the benefit of elevated MEG efficiency. I. INTRODUCTION NANOMATERIALS have recently emerged as possible building blocks for solar energy conversion devices [1], [2]. One of the most promising types is the semiconductor quantum dot (QD)-based solar cell. QDs possess several advantages for use as light harvesters in solar cells. First, the well-known size quantization effect allows the absorption spectrum to be tuned by changing the QD size or shape [2]. Second, colloidal QDs can be used in low-cost solution processing for incorporation in thin-film photovoltaics [3]. Third, QDs have broad absorption profiles and possess large extinction coefficients and intrinsic dipole moments compared with conventional dyes [4], [5]. Fourth, colloidal QD-based cells are compatible with other techniques beneficial to photovoltaic efficiency, such as light trapping by plasmonic nanocolloids [6]. Fifth, the optical properties of colloidal QD can be further controlled via the ligands used to passivate their surface [7]. Finally, QDs raise the possibility of utilizing hot electrons [8] or multiexciton generation (MEG) [9], [10] (the generation of two or more excitons from a single photon) to maximize the efficiency of solar cells. In a standard solar cell, all of the energy of an absorbed photon in excess of the effective bandgap of the material is dissipated as heat and essentially wasted. In colloidal QDs (for example, made of CdSe, CdTe), this excess photon energy can be utilized due to a process known as MEG or direct carrier multiplication. In this process, the high-energy photon creates a high-energy exciton that can decay into a biexciton. For this process to occur, the energy of the exciton has to be at least twice as big as the energy of the effective optical gap, i.e., Een − Eh0 ≥ 2 |Ee0 − Eh0 |, where e0 and h0 denote the electron and hole ground states and en is a state higher in the conduction band. This allows for greater utilization of high-energy photons and dramatically increases solar cell efficiency. The MEG process competes with other radiative and nonradiative recombination and relaxation processes, most of all with Auger cooling [11]–[13]. To further increase the solar cell efficiency, it is necessary to optimize the shape and composition of the QD in order to maximize the ratio of MEG to cooling processes. Theoretical predictions indicate that MEG has the potential to enhance the efficiency of a single-gap cell from 33% to 44% [14], [15]. Full realization of this potential requires that the energy threshold for MEG be minimized. An attractive interaction between excitons reduces the threshold by the biexciton binding energy BXX , but this has been found to be small (−10 meV) for type-I QDs. Previous calculations of BXX = EXX − 2EX in type-II CdSe/CdTe QDs have found a large repulsion between excitons [16], while experiment suggests the opposite, i.e., stronger attraction between excitons in the biexciton. To resolve this ambiguity and gain deep insight in the excitonic structure of colloidal core/shell CdSe/CdTe type-II QDs, we investigate many-electron effects, like correlation and exchange on the excitonic structure in this class of QDs. We also calculate the effect of the reduction of the MEG threshold by strong biexciton binding on the ultimate efficiency of an ideal cell. II. THEORETICAL METHOD When compared with the single-material QD, core/shell QDs offer an extra degree of freedom in designing a type-II structure in which the conduction and valence band states can be spatially separated. This separation is schematically shown in Fig. 1. In the case of QDs with a CdSe core and CdTe shell, after a certain shell thickness, the valence band states are strongly confined in the shell region, while conduction band states are either confined in the core or spread over the whole structure. Our approach can be divided into two parts: First, we calculate the single-particle electron and hole states, and then, we use that information to build the many-body Hamiltonian that is used to calculate many-body states such as excitons and biexcitons. To find single-particle states, we used the eight-band k · p Hamiltonian that includes effects of strain and piezoelectricity at the core/shell interface [17], [18]. The Hamiltonian is parameterized by material parameters taken either from experiment or from ab initio hybrid density functional calculation using B3LYP and PBE0 functionals [19]. The large difference in dielectric permittivities of QD and colloid materials induces significant surface charges, which strongly interact with the charges inside the QD [16], [20]. This effect is fully taken into account in our model by spatial variation of the dielectric constant ε = ε(r) that enters the expression for the Coulomb integrals Vijkl: Vijkl = e 4πε0 dr1 dr2 ψ∗ i(r1 )ψ∗ j (r2 )ψk (r2 )ψl(r1 ) εr (|r1 − r2 |)|r1 − r2 | (1) where e is the electron charge, ε0 is the permittivity of free space, εr is the spatial variation of the relative dielectric prematurity across the QD, and ψ(r) are the single particle swage functions of states involved in the Coulombic interaction. The dielectric properties of the constituent materials were predicted by the time-dependent density functional theory [21]. The manybody configuration interaction (CI) Hamiltonian contains only particle-conserving terms and is given by H = i Eieˆi † eˆi − i Eihˆ i † hˆ i + 1 2 ijkl Viljk eˆi † eˆj † eˆk eˆl + 1 2 ijkl Viljkhˆ i † hˆ j † hˆ khˆ l− ijkl (Viljk −Vikjl) ˆei † hˆ j † hˆ k eˆl. (2) To get excitonic states, we write the Hamiltonian [see (2)] in a two-particle basis (one electron and one hole) |i,j  = |ei  |hj  , Fig. 2. Energies of the 1S(e ) 1/ 2nS(h ) 3/ 2 (n = 1, 2) excitons (theory lines) for CdTe/CdSe QDs with (a) ac = 1.72 nm and (b) ac = 1.95 nm; experimental data are shown as filled symbols. Error bars represent an uncertainty of 1 ML (≈±0.3 nm) in the shell thickness. Dashed lines show upper and lower limits on the exciton energies resulting from an uncertainty of 1 ML in the nominal core radii. and for biexcitons, we use a four-particle basis |i,j,k,l  = |ei  |hj   |ek   |hl  [18]. III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS The 1S(e) 1/2nS(h) 3/2 (n = 1, 2) states are the two lowest energy excitons observed in the absorption spectra of colloidal CdTe/CdSe NCs [22]–[24], making them the most important for understanding the near band-edge absorption characteristics of such nanoparticles. In Fig. 2, we compare the 1S(e) 1/2 1S(h) 3/2 and 1S(e) 1/2 2S(h) 3/2 exciton energies (solid lines) calculated using the CI Hamiltonian as a function of shell thickness for CdTe/CdSe QDs with (a) ac = 1.72 nm and (b) ac = 1.95 nm. Dashed lines show upper and lower limits on the exciton energies resulting from an uncertainty of 1 monolayer (ML) in the displayed core radii (∼±0.3 nm). Filled circles show exciton energies taken from the first and second absorption peak positions in absorption spectra measured by 1) Ma et al. [25] and 2) Oron et al. [22]. We see good quantitative agreement between the calculated exciton energies and the experimental data, with the data lying in the channels defined by an uncertainty of ±1 ML in the core size. Our calculations accurately reproduce the 0.25- eV energy separation between the 1S(e) 1/2 1S(h) 3/2 and 1S(e) 1/2 2S(h) 3/2 excitons that is nearly independent of shell thickness. This constant energy separation is characteristic of changing electron confinement but approximately constant hole confinement in heterostructures when hole is mainly confined in the core region. In Fig. 3, we compare the exciton dipole spectrum of (a) an ac = 2 nm, as = 1 nm CdTe/CdSe QD and (b) an equivalent ac = 3.8 nm CdTe QD calculated using the CI Hamiltonian. The radius of the core-only QD is chosen such that the absorption wavelength of its ground state exciton is the same as that of the core/shell QD. The energy gap between the 1S(e) 1/2 1S(h) 3/2 and 1S(e) 1/2 2S(h) 3/2 excitons is increased from ∼0.1 eV in the core-only QD to ∼0.18 eV in the core/shell structure. The size of the ground state exciton optical dipole matrix element is reduced by about 30%, from 0.15P2 0 (where P0 is the bulk optical dipole matrix element) in the core-only QD to 0.11zP2 0 in the core/shell QD due to reduced election–hole overlap and electron delocalization (the ac = 2 nm, as = 1 nm QD lies in the quasi-type-II regime1). As expected, the CdTe QD shows slightly stronger absorption than its CdTe/CdSe QD counterpart [see Fig. 3(c)], mainly due to the better overall overlap between electron and hole states in core-only QDs compared with type-II structures. However, we note that type-II QDs overall have superior absorption properties compared with core-only QDs for the important application area of QD-sensitized solar cells. For example, the type-II band alignment allows the band-edge absorption to be red-shifted compared with the core-only QD—this is often desirable because the optimum energy for exploitation of the solar spectrum is ∼1.35 eV. Type-II QDs also allow greater absorption ranges to be achieved compared with core-only QDs since the absorption edges are not limited by the energy gap of the underling bulk materials. As previously mentioned, full realization of MEG potential for elevated solar cell efficiency requires that the energy threshold for MEG be minimized. An attractive interaction between excitons reduces the threshold by the biexciton binding energy, but this has been found to be small in magnitude for type-I QDs [26]. Previous calculations of BXX in type-II CdSe/CdTe QDs have found a large repulsion between excitons. Here, we show that taking into correlation account allows combinations of core diameter and shell thickness to be found for a CdSe/CdTe core/shell QD that result in large values of BXX < 0. Using the full CI Hamiltonian, we have found that: 1) it is not possible to predict biexciton binding using the Hartree approximation alone when effects of exchange and correlations are ignored; it can only be predicted with a full CI Hamiltonian; 2) CI predicts BXX  −45 meV for structures with ∼0.5 nm thick shell; 3) it is not possible to predict biexciton binding for structures with shell thickness >0.75 nm if dielectric confinement is ignored; and 4) a proper calculation of BXX requires the inclusion of correlation and surface polarization effects. The strong biexciton binding found is explained by a stronger reduction in the Coulombic repulsion between holes than reduction in the attraction between electrons and holes on the addition of the CdTe shell layer, which is a consequence of the fourfold degeneracy of the hole ground state imposed by symmetry of the structure. The characteristic minimum in BXX that occurs for certain CdTe shell thicknesses cannot be explained unless the quantum mechanical effect of correlation is taken into account explicitly. Our CI analysis suggests that there are large differences between the correlation energy Ecorr. XX of a biexciton and the correlation energy Ecorr. X of the exciton, i.e., that the relation Ecorr. XX = 2Ecorr. X does not hold. In Fig. 4, we present the exciton correlation energy as a function of shell thickness in CdSe/CdTe QDs with ac = 3.5 nm. It is visible that the correlation energy reaches its minimum in the vicinity of the localization boundary for the ground state hole, i.e., for the shell thickness when hole charge density starts to localize from core toward the shell region [24]. This characteristic distance coincides with the one at which BXX exhibits its largest value, suggesting that the dominant effect on large biexciton binding in core/shell structures is due to effect of correlation. Using the correlated exciton energies and correlated optical dipoles, we have predicted that the radiative times in CdSe/CdTe QD with ac = 2 nm increase by only one order of magnitude (from ∼2 to ∼20 ns) when the QD shell thickness is increased from 0 to 2 nm (see Fig. 5). These results are in excellent agreement with experimentally measured radiative times on similar type-II QD structures [23]. However, the same change in shell thickness causes the nonradiative Auger electron cooling times to increase by three orders of magnitude (from ∼1 to ∼1 ns) (see Fig. 6). Such a dramatic slowdown of the Auger electron cooling could be of the potential benefit for increased MEG efficiency. The observation that radiative lifetimes and Auger cooling times can be changed by one and three orders of magnitude, respectively, seems to be unique to colloidal typeII QD structures and distinct from epitaxially grown type-II structures in which both times increase over three decades by appropriate wave function engineering [27]. We attribute this behavior to the strong dielectric confinement effects existing in colloidal structures [24], in contrast with epitaxial structures which have uniform dielectric constants. The potential increase in solar cell performance produced by MEG has been investigated previously for colloidal QDs with a negligible biexciton binding energy [14], [15], [28]. These studies used the detailed balance model introduced by Shockley and Queisser [29] to determine the effect of MEG on the maximum efficiency of an ideal device. Such a device is assumed to lose some of the energy of incident sunlight by three processes: solar photons with energy less than the bandgap, Eg , are not absorbed and so do not contribute to the photocurrent; some of the photogenerated carriers radiatively recombine; and the energy of the absorbed photon in excess of the bandgap is lost as heat as the photogenerated carriers cool to the band. The relative contribution of these processes to the overall energy budget depends on the bandgap of the material [30], but for a value close to the optimum of Eg ≈ 1.3 eV for exploitation of the solar spectrum [29], the most important loss mechanism is the cooling of the carriers. For a single-junction Si device, for instance, carrier cooling accounts for 47% of the incident energy, compared with 1.6% and 19% for radiative recombination and low-energy photons remaining unabsorbed, respectively [31]. However, the MEG process allows some of the energy of the hot carriers to be used instead to generation additional electron– hole pairs before cooling occurs, thus enhancing the photocurrent of the cell. MEG can occur only when one or other of the photogenerated electron or hole has an energy above the band edge equivalent to Eg . Since the excess energy available after absorption is divided between the two carriers depending on their relative effective masses, with the lightest carrier receiving the most energy, the most efficiency situation is when one carrier has a much smaller mass than the other [30]. In this case, the threshold for MEG occurs for photons of energy approximately equal to 2Eg . At this point, the photogeneration quantum yield (QY), which is zero below the bandgap and equal to 100% for energies above the bandgap but below the MEG threshold, rises to 200%. The QY rises by an additional 100% every time the photon energy, hν, reaches another multiple of Eg , e.g., attaining 300% for hν = 3Eg , 400% for hν = 4Eg . In contrast, without MEG, the value QY remains at 100% for hν ≥ Eg . The effect of MEG can be incorporated in the detailed balance model by using a QY function that increases stepwise by 100% as hν equals each multiple of Eg . This analysis yields a maximum solar efficiency of 44%, a significant improvement on the value of 33% without MEG [14], [15], [28]. Schaller et al. [26] first recognized that an attractive interaction between excitons would improve the efficiency of photovoltaic devices benefiting from MEG, reducing the threshold photon energy by BXX . However, the authors also recognized that biexciton binding in type-I colloidal QDs was too weak, at BXX ∼ −10 meV, to have a significant effect. The potential enhancement to solar cell output produced by the combination of efficient MEG and strong biexciton binding was analyzed by McElroy et al. [32]. This study was based on the detailed balance model and included the effect of MEG by the stepwise increase in QY used previously. However, the additional photon energy required for each step increase in QY above 100% was reduced by BXX . This was expressed as QY (hν,Eg )=∞ n=1 θ(hν,hνn ) and hνn = n i=1 i (3) where θ is the Heaviside unit step function, and i is the energy required to create the ith exciton. The exciton creation energy for the first exciton is just the bandgap, i.e., 1 = Eg , and for simplicity, it was assumed that exciton interactions reduce the energy required to create further excitons by the same amount i.e., i>1 = Eg − BXX . The reduced energy need to produce multiexcitons enhances the photogenerated current density: Ipg = e ∞ 0 QY (hν,hνn )φ(hν)d(hν) (4) and also affects the recombination current density, as Ir = 2πe h3 c2 ∞ 0 QY (hν,hνn )(hν)2 exp{[hν − qV QY (hν,hνn )]/kB T} − 1 d(hν) (5) since both integrals depends on BXX [15]. In the expressions above, φ(hν) is the spectral photon flux density, h is Planck’s constant, q is the electronic charge, c is the speed of light, hν is the energy of the sun photons, kB is Boltzmann’s constant, and T is the temperature (set to 300 K here). The operating voltage V is assumed to be equal to a constant quasi-Fermi level separation and is numerically optimized to give the maximum efficiency, which is the ratio of output power to input power, given by ηpv = (Ipg − Ir) · V/Ee , where Ee is the total solar irradiance. Here, the total irradiance and solar flux are set to the AM1.5G solar spectrum [33]. Fig. 7 shows the efficiency of an solar cell calculated in this way as a function of Eg for a number of values of BXX . Also shown for comparison is the efficiency of an ideal device without MEG, reproducing the results first reported by Shockley and Queisser. For BXX = −10 meV, which corresponds to the typical binding energies reported for type-I colloidal QDs [34], the efficiencies peaks at 45%, only a marginal increase on the maximum achieved for a cell benefiting from MEG but with no binding. The peak efficiency grows to 46% and then to 47% as BXX increases to −25 and −50 meV, respectively. The largest biexciton interaction energy reported to date is ∼100 meV [35], although this was repulsive (i.e., antibinding) rather than attractive, it gives an indication of the magnitude of the biexciton interaction energies that can be achieved in a type-II colloidal QD. For a binding energy of −100 meV, the peak efficiency rises to 50% and would rise to as much as 60% if it was possible to produce a binding of −200 meV. It can also be observed from Fig. 7 that the value of Eg corresponding to the peak efficiency shifts progressively to lower values as the photocurrent is enhanced first by MEG alone, and then by the combined effects of MEG and biexciton binding. IV. CONCLUSION In contrast with core-only QDs, our results show that the charge separation due to the type-II band alignments in core/shell QDs leads to strong deviations from the strong confinement approximation; this necessitates the inclusion of exchange and correlation effects for the realistic description of exciton states [24]. The exciton binding energy and recombination probability can be significantly affected by the dielectric environment. By varying the shell thickness, the absorption properties of core/shell structures are slightly affected when compared with equivalent core-only QD structures. However, the introduction of a shell leads to 1) the appearance of strongly bound biexcitonic states that minimize the threshold for the MEG process; 2) increased radiative times in core/shell structures when compared with equivalent core-only QDs (enabling better charge extraction in core/shell MEG structures); and 3) while radiative relaxation times are increased by one order of magnitude with introduction of shells, the detrimental Auger election cooling process is slowed down by three order of magnitudes from ∼1 ps to ∼1 ns time scale. All those effects acting together can make the colloidal core/shell QD structures promising material for MEG solar cells. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors would like to acknowledge the help from the N8 Research Partnership and Science and Technology Facilities Council for providing the computational resources used to conduct this research. They would also like to express their gratitude to W. Flavell, P. O’Brien, and T. Walsh for useful discussions. Abstract: Direct oxidation of methane to methanol holds considerable potential for producing liquid fuel from natural gas- A vanadium and bismuth promoted M0Q3/O2Q3/ SiCh catalyst system prepared by coprecipitation was investigated at various temperatures and V and B promoter content. Then homogeneous gas phase oxidation reaction was also studied for comparison. It was found that HCHO and CŒ were the primary products during the non-catalytic homogeneous reaction with CH3OH produced when the reaction temperature increased. However, the primary products in the catalytic reaction were ChbOH and CO- These results suggest that the methane catalytic oxidation mechanism differ somewhat from the non-catalytic one. In-situ FTIR and TPD studies suggest that promoter V promote activation of the C- H bond of OU and that Bi be a good promoter to keep the desirable products from deep oxidation as wel I as enhance the bulk diffusion rate of lattice oxygen that may favor the methanol formation. Adjusting the content of the V and Bi oxides and the preparation conditions, it provided a best Bi-V-Mo-Cr-Qx/SiCh catalyst system that achieved up to 80% CH3OH+ HCHO selectivity with about 13% CK conversion Introduction According to th e specialists predictions, the share of natural gas consumed worldwide will exceed that of petroleum early next century. Th e governments of many countries and worldwide chemical companies all have their long-term plans to efficiently utilize natural gas resources. Th e direct partial oxidation of m ethane ( D POM) has the potential of more efficiently producing methanol fuel and petrochemicals since it bypasses the energy intensive step of syngas formation that is the intermediate step of indirect conversion from natural gas to methanol. DPOM technology is particularly suitable for converting surplus natural gas, remote natural gas, and natural gas from small reservoirs. For th e latter two sources the transportation cost of the natural gas is so high that conversion into easily transported liquid fuels may be the only way to economically utilize the resource. Some evaluation reports ' on direct methane conversion to oxygenates indicated that the DPOM process had potentially high methanol selectivity, simple flow diagram, moderate reaction conditions, and favorable chemical equilibrium. With high methanol selectivity (> 80%) and reasonable conversion rate (10 % ~15%) , the direct partial oxidation route will be far superior to the indirect conversion that has already been industrialized, particularly in the heat transfer dutiesAchieving the high selectivity and reasonable conversion rate mentioned above requires overcoming some difficulties. First, th e methane C~H bond is ex - tremly stable- To break this bond without using brute force is an important goal. Secondly, the formations of ŒhOH , HCHO, CO and CO2 appear to follow different reaction routes and require different forms of oxygen species. Another important objective is to prevent desirable products from deeply oxidizing to CO and CO2. This paper presents experimental results for both homogeneous non-catalytic and heterogeneous catalytic partial oxidation of methane. 1 Experimental A fixed-bed reactor with a close fitting quartz glass insert with a 6 mm i. d. was used in the activity experiments. Th e reactor was used for both non - catalytic and catalytic methane oxidation reactions. T h e catalyst bed was supported on a quartz chip pad and quartz chips were used to replace the catalyst to maintain the same space velocity during th e non - catalytic reactions. Experiments wer e carried out un - der th e following conditions: feed, CH4/O2 ratio was kept at 4. 5 for feed space velocities from 4 000 h~ to 6 000 h~ and the reaction pressure and temperature were 5.0 MPa and 400 ~ 480 "C respectively. Th e flow of the reactant gases was controlled by a mass flow controller. Th e reaction manifold was kept at 120 C to prevent condensation of liquid products. An on-line gas Chromatograph (GC) used to analyze the effluent sample has two columns: GDX-104 and Carbonsieve- Vanadium and bismuth oxide promoted M o-Cr/SiO 2 catalysts wer e used in this study. They were prepared using the coprecipitation method. Th e reaction conditions for catalytic partial oxidation of methane wer e the same as for the non-catalytic reac - tion. 2 Results and Discussion 2.1 Gas phase non-catalytic partial oxidation of methane T h e product distribution from homogeneous partial oxidation of methane is shown in Fig. 1 as a func - tion of reaction temperature. For temperatures from 400 C to 410 C the initial methane oxidation prod - ucts included only carbon dioxide and a small amount of formaldehyde. As the temperature increased, the formaldehyde concentration increased rapidly to a peak at 420 C when carbon monoxide simultaneously appeared at the reactor vent. Methanol was produced at a relatively high temperature . Th e reaction tem - perature for better methanol and formaldehyde selectivity was about 440 C. Below this temperatur e the carbon dioxide mole fraction at the reactor vent was about 4% . If the reaction temperatur e was higher than 450 C, the conversion rate of oxygen increased very quickly to 100%. At the reactor vent the CO2 concentration became very high and the selectivity of CH3OH and HCHO decreased rapidly. These results indicated that partial oxidation products, methanol and formaldehyde, can be obtained without catalyst below 450 C. But the best methane conversion was about 5% ~ 6% , the selectivity of CFhOH and HCHO was about 60% , and the yield was only 3% ~ In-situ FTIR studies of gas phase direct oxida - tion of methane also support the results: HCHO and CO2 were the initial products while HC3OH was only produced at higher temperatures (Tabl e 1). Th e heights of th e IR peaks for each species represent their concentrations in th e in-situ IR cell. Th e main elementary reactions that can simulate the mechanism of non-catalytic methane direct oxidation are main elementary steps 2£a(kJ/mol) ( 1) CH4+ 02^CH3 + H02* 230 (2) CH3+ 02^CH302 * (3) CH4+ H0 2 '^CH 3 + H2O2 96 (4) H202^2HO ' 193 (5) CH302'^HCHO + HO ' 105 (6) HCHO+ HO'^HCO' + H2O 10 (7) HCHO+ H0 2 '^HCO' + H2O2 54 (8) CH4+ HO'^CH3- + H2O 35 (9) HCHO+ CH3'^CH4 + HCO ' 10) HCO' + 0 2 ^CO + H0 2 ' 11) HCO' + 0 2 ^C0 2 + HO ' 31 12) CH302-+ CH4^CH300H + CH3* 82 13) CH300H^CH30' + HO ' 213 14) CH 3 0 ' + CH 4 ^CH 3 O H + CHs' 46 15) CH30' + 02^H02- + HCHO 16) CO+ H02'^C02 + HO* 77 17) CO+ HO'^C0 2 + H ' 3. 3 T h e activation energies ( Ea) of the primary radical elementary reactions are given to help explaining the experimental results. According to this scheme, the chain reaction is initiated by reaction ( 1). Th e reaction ( 11) suggests that CCh be a primary product but it can also be formed via oxidation of CO (16, IV) . Th e activation energies of reactions (5) , ( 15) and ( 12), ( 13) , ( 14) imply that formaldehyde will be more easily formed than m et h ano 1 at relatively low temperatures. As the temperature increased, the concentration of some species which result in deep oxidation of methane, such as HCte* and HO* , will increase in the gas phase- As a result, th e selectivity of the desirable products will decrease2.2 Homogeneous -heterogeneous combined catalytic partial oxidation of methane Many studies have shown that molybdenum sup - ported on silica has high activity for the partial oxida - tion of methane with molecular oxygen as the oxidant. Our work has focused on the studies of vanadium and bismuth oxides promoted Mo-Cr-Si02 cata - lysts. Various factors controlling direct methane oxiidation, such as temperature and content of V and Bi promoters, have been investigated. Th e behavior of vanadium and bismuth oxide promoted Mo~Cr/Si02 catalysts for controlled oxidation of methane was shown in Table 2. These catalysts demonstrated very different conversion of CH4 and selectivity to CH3OH. Th e methane conversion rate increased while m et h ano 1 selectivity generally decreased with increasing vanadium oxide loading. However, the methane conversion rate decreased while the methanol selectivity increased when the bismuth ox - ide loading was increased. These results suggest that promoter V promote activation of the C - H bond of CH4 while Bi keeps the desirable products from deep ox idat io n - T h e data in T able 3 shows th e effect of V and Bi content on conversion and selectivity at different re - action temperatures. CH3OH was the primary prod - uct in th e catalytic oxidation of methane. However, HCHO was the primary product during the non - catalytic partial oxidation of methane- Adjusting the content of th e V and Bi oxides and the preparation conditions may provide the best Bi-VHVlo-Cr catalytic system with high CH3OH+ HCHO selectivity at a reasonable CH4 conversion rate. Th e optimum reac - tion temperatur e was about 480 C at which a high CH3OH selectivity and a high methane conversion rate were gotten. Above this temperature, the methanol selectivity fell and oxygen conversion rate rapidly reached 100%. It is interesting to note that the optimum temperature for the catalytic direct oxidation of methane was about 30 C higher than for the non-catalytic re - action. For example, At 480 "C the CH30H+ HCHO selectivity was about 80% for catalytic oxidation but the selectivity was very low for the non-catalytic oxidation at the same temperature. Thes e results strongly suggest that the mechanism of catalytic diirect oxidation of methane may differ somewhat from the non-catalytic process. In other words, catalysts may open a new pathway to methanol while inhibiting the pathway leading to methane deep oxidation in the gas phase by stopping some of th e radical reac - tions- Th e bismuth oxide promoter might play an important role in these gas phase-surface combining re - actions because these phenomena were not found with BÍ2O3 free catalysts- Therefore the following hypoth - esis is put forward: th e multicomponent catalysts with bismuth oxide loading not only enhance the rate According to many research groups ' , it is be - lieved that the intermediate species ( 0 ) a over the catalyst are most likely to cause deep oxidation of methane and to activate C - H bond of methane, wh - lie lattice oxygen ( 0 ) to cause methanol and formaldehyde formation. Quick deep reduction of molecular oxygen 02(g) to lattice ( 0 ) is crucial to good selectivity. If the intermediate species ( 0 ) a have a long lifetime, the selectivity of desirable prod - ucts (CH3OH/HCHO) will decrease even though the conversion of methane can be maintained at a high level. In addition, Bi oxide may improve the oxygen transfer speed from adsorptive oxygen ( 0 ) a to lattice oxygen ions ( 0 ~ ). Th e main elementary reac - tions of homogeneous-heterogeneous combined partial oxidation of methane are postulated as follows. T h e catalytic surface reactions are: of bulk diffusion of lattice oxygen, but also favor the formation of CH3OH/HCHO and may also possibly favor the formation of certain intermediate species that inhibit the gas phase radical reactions which lead to complete oxidation of CFU. Some direct evidence has been obtained using T PD studies. A comparison of O2-TPD spectra from two cata - lysts with different V/Bi rations at different adsorbed temperatures is shown in Fig-2. Th e catalyst containing more vanadium oxide showed a more intense oxygen peak desorbing at about 200 C. These peaks are believed to represent adsorptive oxygen species over the catalyst- Both TPD and activity experimental results indicated that vanadium oxide favored the formation of surface adsorptive oxygen-Oa (between the initial state of 02(g) and the final state of Oiattice, such as O2 , 0 ) : phase, reactions (6), (7), (8) , ( 16) , and ( 17) are no more important than thos e in purely non-catalytic oxidation of methane. To a certain extent, the complete oxidation of methane in gas phase (e.g. reac - tions ( 16) and ( 17)) was inhibited, while a new pathway to methanol was opened through catalytic surface reaction (reaction ( 25)). Th e cooperative ac - tion of multi~metal oxides for the conversion of oxidant 02(g) to the active species ( 0 ) is shown in re - actions (18) ~(24) . T hese steps may explain the improved experimental results- Further work is being carried out to obtain more direct evidences3 Conclusions 1) Vanadium and bismuth promoted Mo~Cr/ SÍO2 catalysts effectively promot e the controlled oxidation of methane to methanol, which may make it competitive with indirect conversion of methane to methanol. 2) V and Bi promoters might play an important role in the homogeneous-heterogeneous combining reactions. They not only enhance the migration rate of lattice oxygen on the surface of multi^netal oxides, but also inhibit the complete oxidation of methane in the gas phase. Therefore methanol selectivity is maintained at a higher level in the catalytic partial oxidation of methane than in the non-catalytic oxidation at high temperature.


 

