Engineering is Fun: Embedded CDIO Elements in Electrical and Electronic Engineering Final Year Project.Abstract—Many electrical and electronic engineering program has been developed to educate, train and groom future electrical and electronic engineers. Students that are not able to understand, visualize and relate real application with theoretical concept will find it difficult to cope with the program. Thus the intention of this paper is to demonstrate the approach of Engineering is fun with ConceptDesign-Implement-Operate (CDIO) concept embedded in Final Year Project (FYP) Electrical Engineering Diploma Program at the Faculty of Electrical Engineering Universiti Teknologi MARA (UiTM) Pasir Gudang Campus.  FYP are being conducted for two semesters. The first semester is where students will search and choose their own topic. Furthermore, students have to present and propose the topics they have chosen in the same semester and lecturers will access their communication skills. The prototype will be built during the second semester and it will test the student’s psychomotor  skills. This paper will show an example of one student FYP product prototype called The Evolution of  Mastermind Boardgame pertaining to the embedded CDIO concepts. It is hoped from this work, student’s understanding can be strengthen in order to develop students that fully equipped with strong background of electrical and electronic engineering concept.In the era of globalization engineering field have become important to the vast and rapid growth in technology. Related to this trend, the needs and demand of quality engineers have been increasing drastically. In order to cater for this demand, higher learning institution has to produce an engineering program that is parallel with the current trend that lead to certain changes in learning approaches. Engineering education in between 50’s and 60’s began with practice and later enhanced with science and practice. Towards the millennium, engineering education have been focusing on science, technology, concept and fundamentals with little expose on practice and implementation [1]. It is known that a competent engineer is being defined as a problem solver that able to define and state the reason contributing to the problem with precise judgement with a simple solution that results to a better quality of life. In order to qualify for a degree program they should have an entry level  of qualification such as a diploma or equivalent. A diploma program is important and crucial for the development of psychomotor skills related to science and theory. Moving towards the future, the electrical engineering diploma program in the Faculty of Electrical Engineering (FEE) UiTM Pasir Gudang campus have adept and embrace the concept and element of CDIO concepts in its Final Year Project subject.CDIO [2] approach is a worldwide academic curriculum approach that are widely used in engineering education. Extensive CDIO approach have been implanted in    [3-7] implement the CDIO approach for its learning process.  The problems that the majority of students in FEE UiTM Pasir Gudang campus is facing now relating theoretical concept with practical implementation. Furthermore, communication skills are absence to deliver a good presentation and presenting ideas. Authors in [8]suggests due to the fact that there is a gap between science and arts where engineering education focuses on analytic and less beautification on results presentation. Furthermore [8] suggest education in engineering have to be reformed towards sustainable environment. Students should become more independent with problem base and project base learning that is  successfully proven to mould critical thinking future engineers[9]. A good outcome of CDIO practice have been mentioned [10] where the quality and graduate employment increase before the implementation of the CDIO curricular syllabus. Thus this paper main objective is to demonstrate the initial step taken to implement the CDIO approach in the FYP subject for final year Diploma students. A sample of one FYP project will  be discussed from the initial stage of brain storming to the final stage of demonstration of the functional project prototype. It is hope from this project, a good quality of students will be mould with the necessary critical thinking, designing capability and communication skills.A. Engineering is Fun.Engineering is fun are being introduced to make students feel less stressful during their implementation of the FYP. Students are being approached with this concept to disable mind blocking concept. The FYP projects have to be based on but not limited to gamification concept. The gamification are based on simple concept of electric circuit such as voltage divider rule, current divider rule, mesh analysis, nodal analysis and many more. Thus it will create a lot and wide of ideas to be implemented. Students are encouraged to select an easy topic. From the easy topic, it will be intergrated with the concept of electrical circuit and create a prototype that is being enhanced with technological characteristics from a nontechnological as shown in an advance gamification concept in.B. CDIO Embedded Element.Figure 1 shows the flowchart and activities that relate the CDIO concept with the FYP subject. Students will be working in a group of two people. During the 1st semester student are being given stipulated time to brain storm and think a suitable project title to be made. Lecturer will act as a supervisor to assess the topic either it is too difficult or too easy. After a title have been decided, student have to design their own circuit based on the title and came out with a simulation results. At the end of the semester a presentation by the student to their panels are being conducted. During the first semester, students are being assessed on how they present to the panels. The communication skills one of CDIO elements contributed to the grades of the students.During the 2nd semester students will construct and built the circuit hardware. Students have to design their own PCB track based on the proposed schematic diagram. Once completed, students have to do on their own the etching, drilling and soldering process. This process is important for diploma level students as it will assess their psychomotor skills. At the last steps students have to demonstrate an operational design prototype. During this semester, majority of the marks given are based on functional prototype, the design PCB track with less jumpers, the size of the PCB board and the neatness of the component soldering. During the implementation of the FYP lecturer will give a minimal but compact supervision for students. This enable students to explore vast information from the internet and develop their own creativity as being stated in [12] project based learning enable students to motivate themselves to achieve successful experimental results. From this CDIO approach, the basic competences mentioned in [13]  have been applied in this FYP syllabus.A. Evolution of Mastermind Board.Mastermind was created in the seventies (1970). The conventional mastermind board game is being shown in Figure 2. It was perhaps a mind testing logic games invented to test the IQ of the player itself. It have attracted worldwide phenomenon   due to its fundamental complexity and information-theoretic question. The game only needs two players. The two players have to become either a code-maker or a code-breaker. It begins with only 4 coloured pegs chosen from 6 colours available. Code-maker chooses a pattern of four code pegs and placed into the row. Then the, code-breaker will guess the pattern in order. If the code breaker match the colour of the pattern chose by the code-maker, the code-maker have to put either black or white pegs to give a hint for the code breaker. . A colour of black key peg is placed for each code pegs which is correct in both colour and positions. A white key pegs indicates the existence of a correct colour code peg placed in the wrong position. The game is interesting because of its mind challenging. But main problem of the game is cheating. Cheating can exist at the code maker. The code maker tends to cheat the code breaker while the code breaker is not paying attention to the board game. The code maker sometimes will change their codes without prior notice of the code breaker. In this case, the code breaker will not win the game when actually the code-breaker is winning the game. In order to overcome this problem certain modification have to be done with the board game. The board game have no indicator to indicate if the code-maker change the code that he have made before the game starts.Thus a propose enhancement and modification of the board game are being introduced and being shown in Figure 3. Figure 3 shows the flow chart of  the modification for the board game. A microcontroller Arduino Mega [14] are being used as the heart of the mastermind board game. A project prototype will be build consist of RGB LEDs and a slot placed on top of a moulded casing. The idea is to insert a resistor in the available slots. The resistor value will determined the colour of the RGB LED. If the RGB LED changed to green colour, a correct resistor is being placed in the correct slot. If the RGB LED changed to blue, correct resistor is being placed in the wrong slots. But if the RGB LED does not change to any colour, a wrong resistor have been inserted into the slot. A random colour code will be determined by the microcontroller. Form this enhancement features, it will create an environment where there are no code-maker exist in the game. The game is now are being played only by the code-breaker compiting with the artificial intelligence programmed in the microcontroller.Resistors are being widely used in this project and the total resistors that have been used for this board game are 45 resistors. Figure 5 shows the schematic diagram of the resistors’s circuit that are being used in this project. The main main electric circuit concept that is being applied in this project is the Voltage Divider Rule. It is being used to calculate the value of resistor that will be inserted in the available slot. R2 is the fixed resistor while R1 will be the changeable resistor that will be inserted in to the slots. The value of the R1 will determine the value of voltage. The colour of the RGB LED will change with respect to the resistor value.Figure 6 shows the circuit of push buttons and buzzer that are being used in this project. The purpose of the buzzer is to indicate that the game have started and the game have ended. For this circuit, two push buttons is being used. The purpose of this push button is for reseting the game  if the player wish to repeat the game. Another one is for play button that the player have to push to continue to the next step. Based on the figure, push buttons and buzzer are being connected with digital pins on the Arduino MEGA. The Arduino will received the instruction either its 1  for push button for turn on or 0 for turn off.The schematic diagram and simulation studies of this project have been performed using Proteus 8 professional software that allows student create clinical executable decision. This software might be helpful for electrical engineering student to perform simulation and schematic design for any design project. The advantage of this software is that it consist of  executable guidelines model and tools. Figure 3.9 shows the schematic diagram for this Electronic Mastermind Board Game that are being simulated using this software. The simulation include the input  and output components together with the brain of this project which is the microcontroller.  In this simulation, the input components is resistors instruction and the output are two push buttons, buzzer and all RGB LEDs. Schematic Diagrams.Figure 4 shows the RGB LEDs that is being fed to the Arduino MEGA. The RGB LEDs consists of three types of basic colours which are red, green and blue. From those colours it can be combine to become different colours. In this circuit, all LEDs are in  common anode connection (connected to a 5V source) to light up the LEDs. To ensure successful turn on and turn off of the LEDs, write in LOW instruction and write in HIGH instruction are being used respectively.A. Project Prototype.Figure 8 shows the project protoype of the evolution of the master mind board game. All the components are being shown in Figure 8. The description are as bellows Random Colour: The R1 resistor that are being tape with red, yellow, green, white and blue.Slots: The slots are being arranged with 3x5 row and column. Player will have 5 chances to play the game.RGB LED The RGB LED is the indicator of correct and incorrect position of the R1 placed in the slot.Solution LED The solution LED is the LED that will show the correct colour if the player can’t guess the correct colour combination after 5 times.Buzzer Emmit sounds when the game have begun and ended.Play button Player have to push the button after inserting the R1 random colour to turn on the RGB LED and move to the next step.Reset button: Player has to push the reset button to replay the game.Figure 9 shows images of all RGB LEDs is fully turn on with Cyan colour except three solution LEDs as soon as the microcontroller get the power supply from a dry cell. This indicated that the game now is starting and ready for the player to insert the random colour resistor in the available slots.Figure 10 shows the Blue LED is turning on. This indicate that  a correct random colour have been inserted in the slots but at the wrong position. In Figure 10 only one RGB LED is turned on with blue colour and the other two led is not turning on. It shows that only one random colour is correct and the other two random colour is wrong. Player have to push the play button in order to insert the next random colour in the available slots.Figure 11 shows Green LED is turned  on. As being stated earlier in the project design section, green led indicate that a correct random colour have been inserted in the correct slots.  In Figure 12 all green LED tunred on indicate that all correct random colour have been inserted in the correct position. The solution LEDs will lights up when player win. If the player can’t guess the correct colour code after 5 attemption, the solution LED will light up to show the answer.This working prototype will be presented and demonstrate on the FYP presentation session. A group of two panels will assessed the FYP project prototype. Students have to be properly attire and prepared presentation slides and any video if available.Results show that the project prototype is being built from a simple concept of voltage divider rule and it is being applied to modify the available board game. The project began with a simple brain storming of a project title. Then it is being designed with a suitable schematic diagram. Simulation tools had been used to achieve a preliminary results. The project prototype were built with basic electronic component and being controlled by a microcontroller. This work demonstrates a CDIO element that is well embedded in the FYP course. Students had to work in a team to ensure functionality prototype is achievable to be built in 2 semesters, short timeframe. Furthermore this work demonstrates that students were able to relate theoretical concept with practical implementation in a design based and problem based project. The most important aspect is that students were free to give their own creativity to build the prototype with minimal supervision, which proves that creativity is achievable with minimal supervision. Indirectly, supervisor and lecturer believe their students can achieve great results from their ideas and creativity. In conclusion, for diploma level, the CDIO concept have shown a great improvement to students in developing critical thinking and psychomotor skills also proves to be fun to execute. As a future work recommendation, the concept of voltage divider rule can be implemented to any conventional board game where necessary.Abstract—The combination of a real experiment with a virtual one in the electrical engineering education increases the students’ interest for the subject and makes the material easier to comprehend. In the following paper, there are examples about demonstrating such complementation and about checking and visualization an analysis of simple electrical circuits. Keywords—electrical engineering, distance learning, e-learning, problems in the electrical engineering education, laboratory exercise I.  INTRODUCTION In the past few years there has been a constant increase in the volume of information and a rapid development of computer applications. On the other hand, there have been a decrease in the time allocated for teaching (workload), less sufficient educational preparation of students in gymnasiums and less financial resources for education. Taking these factors into consideration, there is a demand for a possible intensification in how students are taught about electrical engineering. Moreover, with the recent decrease of teaching time, there is also a drastic decrease in auditing and learning activities. This is especially impactful on the electrical engineering education of nonelectrical engineering students. The traditional electrical engineering problems which are experimented with and solved during laboratory exercises become much more available and easy to understand when information technologies are used. Information technologies can be included as part of the education and be used with the following aims: decreasing of the routine mathematical calculations; visualization of processes; checking correctness of obtained results; comparing solutions obtained using different methods (technologies); modelling of the same or analogical processes. A laboratory base consists of laboratory setups which use different types of sources, controlling and measuring tools. This requires a storage room and financial resources for buying, maintaining and upgrading them. The methodology of conducting laboratory exercises is related to the calculation of values, which describe some given electrical engineering processes and occurrences, as well as their comparison with other measured values and their visualization. To achieve this a laboratory setup is used which includes not only elements, but also measuring tools such as ammeter, voltmeter, digital oscilloscope, etc. required to conduct the ‘real experiment’. The same circuit implemented in a laboratory setup could also be implemented virtually by using the programming environment of MULTISIM, therefore conducting a respective virtual experiment. MULTISIM has a user-friendly interface, a rich library of elements and it is very easy to use. Furthermore, it has specialized functions which cover more than 20 virtual measuring tools for visualizing the behaviour of circuits and it can also be used for analysis not only for electrical engineering, but also for electronics [1, 2, 3, 4]. The latter is especially important for non-electrical engineering students taking ‘Electrical engineering and electronics’ module. It is important to note the fact that a licensed version exists [5]. Software products such as MATLAB, MATHCAD, EXCEL, etc. lie on the border between real and virtual experiment. When a real experiment is conducted, given that students have some basic knowledge about these software products, they can use them for quicker and more precise mathematical calculations, as well as for quick and accurate visualisation of results i.e. waveforms. MATLAB’s programming environment can also be used in following circumstances: Given that the students have some beforehand knowledge about programming of electric circuits and enough time to research methods about their analysis, the use of MATLAB can be very close to the virtual experiment [6, 7]. The interactive environment SIMULINK integrated within MATLAB provides build-in libraries with circuits modelling blocks and its usage is similar to the use of MULTISIM [8, 9].  In the electrical engineering education of non-electrical engineering students in Technical University of Varna there is no possibility for detailed introduction of the phasor analysis and of the effective methods for analysis of electrical circuits such as “Loop analysis” and “Nodal approach” for direct, as well as for alternating current. What they are taught is sufficient basic knowledge so they can become able to examine the design and principle of operation of electrical machines. A few of the main topics that are being discussed are “Analysis of the processes of ideal passive elements Serial RLC-circuits and Parallel RLC-circuits”. The current use of MULTISIM is to visualise the processes examined in simple electric circuits, and in the future, it is to find currents, voltages and powers when calculating complex electric circuits. II. ANALYSIS 2.1. Real experiment What is important for non-electrical engineering students is the examination of passive one-port elements with alternating current. In such way, they acquire knowledge about the analysis of electric circuits and about the work of different electrical and electronic devices. The exercise is conducted using laboratory setups that include similar elements. A general circuits diagram of a laboratory setup is shown in Fig. 1. It allows to independently analyse resistor, ideal capacitor, real inductor and serial or parallel connection of any of those elements. It can also realize unbranched or branched electric circuit and provide the possibility of including or removing elements, as well as measuring tools such as ammeters and voltmeters. The circuit is supplied by a network with industrial frequency and a lower voltage U = 12.8V. The following parameters can be set or measured: resistor with resistance R = 77.4Ω, real inductor with resistance RL = 19.1Ω and inductance L1 = 47mH, capacitors with capacity C1 = 218μF, C2 = 50.4μF. For a passive element with given parameters for active resistance R and reactive resistance X, the impedance Z and the phase difference ɔ are defined with the following equations.During the real experiment the students can: 1. With an RLC-meter measure the parameters of the passive element and from the equations (1) and (2) calculate the impedance and the phase difference of the examined element. 2. With an ammeter and voltmeter measure the effective values of the current and of the voltage of the element and from (3) calculate the impedance according to Ohm’s law. 3. Compare the values of the impedance acquired in (1) and (3), and if there is an appropriate wattmeter find the phase difference from (4) and compare with the value acquired in (2). 4. Plot vector diagrams of the currents and the voltages of different passive elements, as well as the triangle of the resistances. 5. Provided that there is an appropriate mathematical program, plot the waveforms of the current, voltage and power for the different elements. 6. Provided that there is digital oscilloscope view the waveforms of the current and voltage and establish and compare the phase difference. Also, when the mathematical functions of the oscilloscope are used the students can view the waveform for the instantaneous power p(t)=u(t). i(t) and analyse the difference in the powers of active and reactive element. 7. Check in addition whether the Kirchhoff's laws are valid for the effective values. 2.2. Virtual experiment During a virtual experiment with MULTISIM the students can: 1. Plot the circuits diagrams and set the parameters of the elements. 2. For examined passive element, acquire the effective values of the current and voltage and calculate the impedance. 3. Establish the phase difference. 4. Include an oscilloscope and view the waveforms of the currents, voltages and the instantaneous powers. 5. Examine the validity of Kirchhoff’s laws for the effective values. They can change: 1. One or more parameters and establish its impact in respect to currents, voltages and powers. 2. They can examine the impact which a change in the frequency causes. 3. They can modify the real inductor into an ideal inductor. 4. They can change the type of the supply voltage. 5. They can change the positions of the ammeter and voltmeter and guess and confirm what the tools will measure. 6. If the circuit is in resonance, they can determine which parameters and how they should be changed in order to remove the resonance, or the opposite. During the virtual experiment the lecturer can describe in words the schema and the students can try on their own to pick the appropriate measuring equipment. In such live discussion, the students can make corrections and the lecturer can evaluate realistically their practical abilities. In case there are mistakes, the corrections can be made during a live discussion or in the form of a test. In such way, the students not only can show their practical knowledge, but their theoretical knowledge as well. All steps can be conducted successfully for distance learning of students including students with disabilities. For safety reasons, the measured current is small, but for better visualization it is scaled (for the waveforms in MULTISIM and MATLAB), keeping the characteristics of the process. 2.3. Illustrative examples 2.3.1. Purely Resistive AC Circuit The circuit in Fig. 1 is taken with only the resistor with resistance R included. From the waveform – Fig. 2, acquired by using an oscilloscope the students can on their own conclude the following The current and voltage coincide in phase.The instantaneous power oscillates and has a doubled frequency compared to the frequency of the supplying voltage and it is only positive i.e. the active power expresses the irreversible conversion of electric energy in the resistor into heat, lighting, mechanical and other energy. When the circuit is supplied from a generator based on sinusoidal voltage, the form of the sinusoidal values is better than that of a step-down transformer without filters which is the case here. When simulation is done on the same circuit Purely Capacitive AC Circuit (ideal capacitor) The circuit in Fig. 1 is taken with only the capacitor with capacity C1 included. From the waveform in Fig. 5 acquired by oscilloscope students can come on their own to the following conclusions: First is the maximum of the current, after that is the maximum of the voltage i.e. the voltage lags behind in phase. From the waveform – Fig. 6 acquired by oscilloscope students can come with their own efforts to the following conclusions .The instantaneous power oscillates with doubled frequency compared to the frequency of the supplying voltage and there is an oscillation between positive and negative half-waves – there is a continuous periodic exchange between the source and the capacitor i.e. reversible conversion of the energy – charging and discharging of the capacitor. The phase difference can be established. Resistive-inductive AC circuit (real inductor) Because of the existence of the resistance apart from induction in the inductor, the waveform for the instantaneous power is also shifted up in Fig.  9.  In MULTISIM: first is the maximum of the voltage after that is the maximum of the current – Fig. 10; the powers of a real inductor can be seen separately which is not the case when an oscilloscope is included – Fig. 11. Students can compare the waveforms of the capacitive element and inductive element – Fig. 7 and Fig. 10 and establish the difference. Series RLC AC Circuit In this case, the circuit is in resonance for an industrial frequency – Fig. 12. The students can establish that despite the existence of reactive elements the waveform is similar to the one of the resistors and they can explain that with series resonance. They can change the induction twice and the acquired waveforms in MULTISIM will be inductive – Fig. 13. In MULTISIM only the value of one parameter can be changed: of the capacitor, of the inductivity or of the frequency in order to reach a resonance, or the opposite. 2.3.5. Checking Kirchhoff’s laws for the effective values of the current and voltage The check of the first law of Kirchhoff is shown in Fig. 1 for the branched electric circuit. When all elements of the circuit are included the students establish that the effective value of the first current is different from the sum of the effective values of the second and third current: I1  I2 + I3 i.e. 0.243A (0.202 + 0.132)A. The same thing they can also do in MULTISIM. Analogically, for the mesh with the source, the resistor, the capacitor-1 and the inductor the second law of Kirchhoff can be verified. 2.3.6. Vector diagrams Because the current flowing through capacitor 2 is purely capacitive, in the branch node that connects the resistor, capacitor-1 and the inductor, only the resistor can be left connected. Then the students can establish the measured values are summed because of the first law of Kirchhoff in the node, but the sum is a vector sum considering the phase difference. The measured current is I1 = 0.260A. The circuits diagram with the results is also shown in MULTISIM in which the ammeters are real.  In the further electrical engineering work MULTISIM has its uses – for an instance for simulating the working regimes of transformers (open-circuit test and short-circuit test), induction machines, DC machines; in electronics – for simulation of work of half-wave and full-wave rectifiers, bipolar junction and field effect transistors - common base, common emitter, common collector, and others. When it comes to real experiments it is hard to guarantee diversity of elements and that they are analysed with the aim of synthesis of the device. This is much easier done in a virtual environment.  In fact, the models provided in MULTISIM are adequate.  Visualisation in the programming environment MATLAB Programs meant to be used numerous times can be written in MATLAB language and stored as M-files. An M-file written beforehand by the lecturer can be used for educational purposes. In it the visualisation of different types of passive elements is described and the students can choose from the program’s interface the type of the element. By setting up the parameters of the element and the supply voltage, the students can plot waveforms for the current, voltage and power. The example is given for a RL elementThe inclusion of programming environments such as CAD systems allows for more schema solutions to be realized, for visualization of the laws of electrical engineering, for synthesis of different devices and for analysis of the operation of different electronics components. • The usage of programming environments allows for richer education of non-electrical engineering students by providing more practical examples, as well as allowing their additional education or even distance learning. • Students can compare the calculated and measured values of currents and voltages and the phase difference between them using ‘real’, as well as ‘virtual’ laboratory setups. They can see the phase difference between the current and voltage for a given elements, as well as the alternations of the instantaneous power. Depending on the type of the waveforms they can determine what is the nature of the passive element. During the time allocated for laboratory exercises a real experiment can be conducted, whereas for homework students can be given to solve concrete problems using the virtual experiment.The usage of MULTISIM completes the traditional real experiment, but it also provides an opportunity for independent research and provides more opportunities for analysis. It also increases the teaching efficiency and improves the students’ innovative abilities. It enriches the students’ virtual material base and develops skills not only for analysis, but also for synthesis of schema solutions. The relative errors between the measured and the calculated quantities are small enough for the aims of the educational process. In the electrical engineering module for non-electrical engineering students the effective methods for calculation of electric circuits are not taught (the phasor method). Because of that the calculation of complex circuits with frequency domain analysis requires a lot of effort which is not necessary. For students with knowledge of the main electrical and magnetic values and laws is more efficient to learn about MULTISIM in order to understand in details the possibilities of analysis of the electrical state of the circuit. In case they need to they can use MULTISIM for analysis of complex circuits. The suggested technique in this paper can also be used for learning other electrical engineering topics, as well as electronics topics. When virtual models are used the parameters of the elements can be easily tweaked, as well as the frequency of the source, the type of the voltage, i.e. there are more opportunities for experimenting. The simulations implemented using MULTISIM can be used for delivering the lecture material using a multimedia. Combining real and virtual experiment can be used for distance and e-learning.Tensile Strength of Thermally Degraded Resin-Coated Papers and Their Electrical Breakdown Strength in Composite Insulation System with Insulation Oil. Abstract: Two types of resin-coated papers were investigated; kraft papers and heat-resistant kraft papers partially covered with epoxy resin; those were laminated to some thickness. They were thermally degraded at 120°C for 240 to 1320 hours, and their mechanical strength, i.e. tensile strength was measured. The tensile strength of the resin-coated kraft paper decreased with the heating time and became smaller than that of the pressboard after 500 hours while the tensile strength of the resin-coated heat-resistant kraft paper almost retained the initial value after 1320 hours of the heating time. Then, electrical breakdown characteristics of composite insulation systems with a resin-coated paper and insulation oil were investigated. In the system, an oil-filled gap was artificially introduced between the resin-coated paper and a plane electrode to induce partial discharge (PD) initiation at the same location. PDs occurred before breakdowns and their PD inception electric field strength was almost as high as pressboards and the effect of the heating time was negligible. Characteristics of electrical breakdown field strength were similar to the PD inception field strength; negligible effects of the type of the resin-coated papers and the heating time. Electrical breakdown occurred at the oil-filled gap and the edge of a high voltage electrode. Synthetic resin-coated insulation papers are used as winding insulation cores of oil-insulated power transformers for up to 66kV, because they are easier to machine than pressboards. However, they have not been used in transformers for 154kV and above, and technical investigations have not been done for their applications. In this study, as one of the technical investigations, mechanical characteristics of resin-coated papers thermally degraded at 120°C in insulation oil were investigated, and their electrical breakdown characteristics in composite insulation systems with insulation oil were evaluated by using an electrode system which had an oil-filled gap artificially introduced between a resin-coated paper and a plane electrode to induce partial discharge (PD) initiation at the same location. These mechanical and electrical breakdown characteristics were compared with those of pressboards which are used in power transformers for 154kV and above. RESIN-COATED PAPER Three types of test sample, i.e. test samples A, B and C, were used in this study. Test samples A and B are resin-coated papers and test sample C is a pressboard. Test sample A is composed of kraft papers which are partially coated with epoxy resin and laminated to some thickness. Test sample B is composed of heat-resistant kraft papers instead of kraft papers. The appearance of test sample B is shown in Figure 1. Epoxy resin is pasted on diamond-shaped parts and is not pasted between the diamond-shaped parts for oil impregnation. Prior to experiments, they were heated in insulation oil at nitrogen gas atmosphere at 120°C for 240, 480, 816, 1104 and 1320 hours. The size of test samples for measurements of mechanical characteristics was 10mm in width, 100mm in length and 1mm in thickness. The number of measurements at each condition was four to seven. The size of test samples for electrical breakdown measurements was 100×100mm and 1mm in thickness. The number of measurements at each condition was three. These samples were kept in insulation oil before experiments. In order to clarify important mechanical characteristics, the tensile strength of the resin-coated papers was investigated. The load at breakdown of a test sample F was measured, and the tensile strength f was calculated by the following equation. where, A is the cross section of the test sample at break point, and t and W are the thickness and the width of the test sample, respectively. MEASUREMENTS OF PD INCEPTION AND ELECTRICAL BREAKDOWN VOLTAGES Electrode System .The schematic diagram of the electrode system is shown in Figure 2. In the electrode system, a test sample is inserted between parallel plane electrodes having 30 and 50mm in diameter. Each of the electrodes is molded by epoxy resin in order to suppress PD initiation at triple junctions among each of the electrodes, the test sample and insulation oil. In the actual composite insulation system, electrical breakdown occurs following PDs at thin oil layers between insulation papers and metal electrodes, and then, in order to form an oil-filled gap and initiate PDs there, a PET film (the relative permittivity of 2.2) having a punch hole at its center is inserted between one of the electrodes and the test sample. Thus, the oil-filled gap has 10mm in diameter and 76μm in height. The electrode system was immersed in mineral oil in experiments. Experimental Setup. Experimental setup was composed of a 50Hz power transformer (70kVrms, 200kVA), the electrode system, an oil bath, a protection resistance (1.5kȍ), a coupling capacitor (100pF), a detection impedance of PD signals and an oscilloscope (DC to 300MHz, 2.5×109Samples/s). In the measurements of PD inception voltages, electrical signals of PDs were detected by the detection impedance connected between the lower electrode and the earth and observed by the oscilloscope. It was confirmed that the transformer and the coupling capacitor were corona-free at 70kVrms. In this experimental setup, the detectable minimum charge magnitude was checked by a calibration pulse generator, which produces 100 pulses per second, and it was 5 pC. In the measurements of electrical breakdown voltages, the detection impedance was removed from the circuit and the lower electrode was grounded.  Experimental Procedure Before voltage applications, we inserted a test sample between electrodes together with a PET film, and slightly pressed them by FRP pressboards and placed them in a vacuum container. Then, we degassed the container by a vacuum pump at the pump speed of 50l/min and removed residual air in the electrode system. After 15 minutes of evacuation, we had put insulation oil into the container until the electrode was totally immersed in insulation oil, and then evacuated the container for 10 minutes. Finally, we pressed the electrode by FPR pressboards so that the test sample was fixed between the electrodes, and fastened the FRP pressboards. In the measurements of PD inception voltages, we increased the applied voltage up to the value (15kVrms) determined by preliminary experiments and kept the level for 1 minute, and then increased it by 1kVrms. We had repeated the steps until PD initiation was observed. Then, we did not stop the voltage application and had repeated the step of the 1kVrms increase in the applied voltage and the following constant voltage level for 30 seconds until electrical breakdown occurred. The root mean square value of the applied voltage at electrical breakdown was regarded as the electrical breakdown voltage. On the other hand, when PD signals were observed on the oscilloscope and their charge magnitude became larger than the threshold charge magnitude qtr, the root mean square value of the applied voltage was regarded as the PD inception voltage. In order to obtain the PD inception voltage at the oil-filled gap in our electrode system, qtr was set at 3000pC since it has been reported that PDs having charge magnitude of 103 to 106pC occur in small oil-filled gaps in composite insulation system with insulation oil and insulation papers [1].  MECAHNICAL CHARCTERISTICS Tensile strength of test samples A to C is plotted as a function of the heating time in Figure 3. Error bars of each plot represent the maximum and minimum values. The initial value of test sample B is the largest and that of the sample C is the smallest.  The tensile strength of test sample A decreases down to about 50% of the initial value after 500 hours and that of test sample C also decreases with the heating time. 050100150200050010001500SampleASampleBSampleCTensile strength [MPa]Heating time [hours] Figure 3.  Effect of heating time on tensile strength. 01020304050050010001500PD BreakdownPartial discharge (PD) inception and breakdown fields [kVrms/mm] Heating time [hours] (a) Sample A010 20 30 40 500 500 1000 1500 PD BreakdownPartial discharge (PD) inception and breakdown fields [kVrms/mm] Heating time [hours] (b)  Sample B 010 20 30 40 50 0 500 1000 1500 PD Breakdown Partial discharge (PD) inception and breakdown fields [kVrms/mm]Heating time [hours] (c)  Sample C Figure 4.  Effect of heating time on partial discharge (PD) inception and electrical breakdown fields. The tensile strength of test sample B keeps the initial value. From the results, it can be said that test sample B has the best mechanical strength among the three types of test samples. PD INCEPTION AND ELECTRICSL BREAKDOWN CHARCTERISTICS PD Inception Characteristics PD inception electric field strength and electrical breakdown electric field strength of test samples A to C are shown as a function of the heating time in Figure 4. The electric field strength is the divided value of the measured applied voltage by the total thickness of the test sample and a PTE film. Error bars of each plot represent the maximum and minimum values. The PD inception field of each test sample in Figure 4 does not represent a monotonous increase or decrease with the heating time. Also, the difference among the values of the test samples is not large, and the PD inception fields are around 20kVrms/mm. Since the PD inception field strength of the electrode system without a PET film was 30kVrms/mm, the PD inception fields in Figure 4 correspond to ones not at the electrode edges but at the oil-filled gap. Electrical Breakdown Characteristics Locations of electrical breakdown in all cases were observed at the oil-filled gap and the edge of the upper electrode. Typical examples are shown in Figure 5. The electrical breakdown of each sample did not limited to one location, and the location did not seem to affect the electrical breakdown field. More electrical breakdowns were found at the electrode edge, and we consider that this is because more intense PDs occurred due to electric field enhancement at the electrode edge even if the edge was molded by epoxy resin. Initiation of PD occurrence is related to breakdown of insulation oil, while electrical breakdown of the insulation system is related to PD resistance of insulation papers, and thus it is possible that the breakdown fields are affected by type and thermal degradation of resin-coated papers. From Figure 4, electrical breakdown fields of test samples A to C are within the range of 21.4 to 43.1kVrms/mm, and their mean values are within the range of 24.3 to 37.8kVrms/mm. The mean value of the standard deviation V is 2.56kVrms/mm. The electrical breakdown field of each test sample in Figure 4 does not represent a monotonous increase or decrease with the heating time, either. The electrical breakdown field of the test samples slightly differs, but considering the scattering of the date, it can be said that the effects of the type and the thermal degradation of the resin-coated papers on electrical breakdown are insignificant in our experimental condition. DISCUSSION Electrical field strength of oil-impregnated papers is related to their PD resistance. The tensile strength of test sample B was independent of the heating time, and so the electrical breakdown strength was considered to be independent of it. However, even if the tensile strength of test sample A decreased down to 50% of the initial value, the electrical breakdown strength kept the initial value. As confirmed by the characteristics of test sample C, it has been reported that the correlation between electrical breakdown strength and thermal degradation of oil-impregnated papers are not as significant as that between mechanical strength and thermal degradation [2], and this can be said to the resin-coated papers investigated in this study. CONCLUSIONS In order to apply resin-coated papers to winding cores of oil insulated transformers for 154kV and above, two types of resin-coated papers and pressboard heated at 120°C in insulation oil for 240 to 1320 hours were used and their tensile strength, PD inception voltages and electrical breakdown voltages were measured. The main results are summarized as follows. (1) The tensile strength of the epoxy resin-coated kraft papers and the epoxy resin-coated heat-resistant kraft papers were larger than that of the pressboard. (2) The tensile strength of epoxy resin-coated kraft papers decreased down to 50% of the initial value after 500 hours of heating and the strength at this time was smaller than that of the pressboard. The epoxy resin-coated heat-resistant kraft papers did not represent the decrease in the tensile strength after 1320 hours of heating. (3) It was estimated that PDs were initiated at an artificial oil-filled gap, and PD inception electric field was independent of the type of the resin-coated papers and the heating time. (4) Electrical breakdown occurred at the artificial oil-filled gap and the edge of a plane electrode. The breakdown location was independent of the type of the test samples and the heating time, and the electrical breakdown fields at the two locations were almost the same. (5) The electrical breakdown fields of the resin-coated papers and pressboard were independent of the heating time. They were slightly different but taking account of the scattering of the data, the difference was insignificant.Education and Research Activities of Electrical Engineering in China’s University and Industry. Abstract— In recent years, the increasing demand of electricity and the new technology applied in the electrical engineering (EE) bring many challenges to the research and education of China’s industry and university. In order to adapt to such changes, the industry, university and government put much efforts on the industry-academic and education cooperation. This paper describes the background, status and problem of the research and education activities of EE in China’s universities and companies. Industry-academic collaboration examples are also presented to demonstrate the typical cooperation models. Suggestions are finally proposed in the conclusion. Keywords—Electrical Engineering; Education; Collabration; Chinese example INTRODUCTION The Discipline of Electrical Engineering (EE) has been founded for more than 100 years in the universities of European and North American countries [1]. During these decades, use of EE increased dramatically. The connotation and extension of EE discipline also kept developing and changing. Before the middle of 19th century, power engineering is the dominant discipline of the EE, which deals with the generation, transmission and distribution of electricity as well as the design of a range of related devices. After then, the development of electronic and computer technology brought evolution on the traditional power engineering. Nowadays, EE defined in the universities of western countries has many sub-disciplines such as power engineering, control engineering, electronic engineering, signal processing, instrumentation engineering, and computer engineering. Different new sub-disciplines interact with each other, which attract many researchers in the universities all over the world. In contrast, the technology of traditional power engineering becomes mature and the companies play an important part in it. In China, although the electronic and information technique put the development of power engineering technique in motion, power engineering is still the main research topic in the department of EE in universities. Research activities of electronic and computer engineering are separated from the power engineering in other departments, which is different from universities in western countries. Apart from the universities, power and energy industry companies in China also play an important role in research of power engineering. For example, the state grid corporation of China and other state-owned power enterprises founded research institutes to solve their technical issues and explore the research frontiers in power engineering.  In recent decades, dramatic growth in the demand for electricity and new technologies employed in the power engineering result in many challenges on the organization, structure and education of power and energy industry companies. More and more distributed generation and renewable energy resources are integrated into the aged power grid. Further development of energy efficiency, demand side management programs and strategies towards carbon footprint sequestration also bring pressure on the power companies [2]. To meet the challenges, the power and energy companies not only put more efforts on expanding and modernizing the existing electrical power generation, transmission, and distribution systems; upgrading the transmission grid with advanced technology implementations, but also concerning more about a looming shortage of appropriately trained new graduates to meet the growing demands in these fields.  This paper describes the background and status of the research and education activities of electric power engineering in China’s universities and companies. Industry-academic collaboration examples are then presented to demonstrate the typical cooperation models. It is noted that Chinese government plays an important role in the development of power industry.  EEACTIVITIES IN CHINA’SUNIVERSITIES EE is an old major in China’s universities, which initiates in the early part of 19th century. Many universities with the strength on engineering and technology have EE department. The population of teachers, researchers and students in EE department are always large compared with other majors in those universities. Table I is an example of the scales of EE department in several China’s universities.  As can be seen, there is small difference on the teachers’ number in different universities. The students’ number of EE department in comprehensive university such as Tsinghua university (THU) and Zhejiang university (ZJU) is smaller than the universities of science and technology such as Xi’an jiaotong university (XJU) and Huazhong university of science and technology (HUST). North China electric power university (NCEPU) is jointly constructed by the Ministry of Education and the University Council which is composed of several state-owned power and energy corporations. It has the largest student numbers majoring EE. TABLE I. SCALES OF EEDEPARTMENT IN SEVERAL CHINA’SUNIVERSITIES University Teachers Undergraduate Students in EE Dept. / total per year Graduate Students per year Master PhD THU 104 120 / 3300 100 30 HUST 139 400/ 7500 200 50 XJU 130 400/ 3800 250 50 ZJU 125 280/ 5500 200 60 NCEPU 150 650/ 2600  420 40 A. Sub-disciplines and research topics Generally, the sub-disciplines of EE in China’s universities are as follows.  (1) Electric Engineering and Automation The main research topics are power system analyzing and planning, operation and control of the power system, protective relaying technology, power marketing and management, renewable energy generation, standalone power systems and so on.  (2) High voltage and insulation technology The main research topics include high voltage insulation, high voltage power transmission and electromagnetic environment, aerial discharge, pulse power technology, plasma technology, intelligent electrical equipments, high voltage testing and diagnostic, grounding lightning protection and overvoltage calculation.  (3) Electrical machinery and appliance The main research topics are motor design and analysis, motion control, machine state monitoring and maintenance.  (4) Power electronics and motor drives The main research topics include power electronic device, renewable power generation, energy storage and energy saving technology, motor drives, power electronics applied in power system.  (5) Electrical engineering theory The main research topics are electromagnetic theory and its application, electromagnetic environment and compatibility, electrical measurement and instruments, circuits and systems theory, power quality technique. Some universities set up special sub-disciplines according to their distinguishing features. For instance, HUST has sub-disciplines of superconducting power application technology, pulse magnetic field technology and magnetic confinement fusion technology in EE department. Xinan Jiaotong university has sub-disciplines of maglev drive technology. Industry-oriented education In order to train the practical ability of the students and prepare the potential employees for the power and energy industry companies, most of the China’s universities designed five categories of on-campus and out-of-campus courses.  (1) Traditional on-site education.Usually, universities provide undergraduate and graduate programs for the students. Both programs offer 4 kinds of courses including basic courses, e.g. math and physics; general engineering courses; general discipline courses; and specialized courses, e.g. courses for Ph.D students.  Experimental education is important parts of the general discipline courses in EE department. Recent years, China’s universities invest more in the student laboratories for experimental education. Laboratories on the new technologies of EE e.g. renewable energy generation, power electronic devices and micro-grids are also built in many universities. The students can operate real down-sized facilities and understand the knowledge from the textbook by simple experiments. Such experimental courses are helpful to improve the practical ability of the students and provide initiative career training for the industry especially in the area of new technology.   (2) Course Exercise In the sophomore year, undergraduate students should take part in course exercise which lasts around 2-4 weeks. The students should finish a small project such as designing an electronic circuit. By doing the course exercise, the students can learn to apply all the professional knowledge comprehensively. Moreover, the students can learn some of the basic engineering skills including report writing, literature reviewing, hardware designing, software debugging and etc.  (3) Internship education In the junior year, undergraduate students should attend the internship education in companies during summer vacation. Within the two month vacation, the students would stay and work in a power company. The company can arrange part-time teachers to show the students around each department and productive process and make lectures to help understanding engineering techniques or the how the company operates.  After that, the students are assigned to the primary sector of the company and join in their routine work. By doing this, the students have better understanding on the companies and their future careers.  (4) Graduation project Senior undergraduate students are required to accomplish a graduation project in order to get their bachelor degree. The project is defined by the supervisors and the students should finish the project independently. Practical projects, such as designing a power supply, are popular to the EE students because the prepared textbook knowledge is verified and comprehensively applied to the practical setups. (5) Research training. Research training is a part of graduate program. Students take part in research projects and make innovations to get their master or Ph.D degree. Usually, the project can be fundamental research sponsored by the government funding or practical issue proposed by the company. Part-time research training program is also setup for the undergraduate students, which is attractive to the one who wants to pursue the master or Ph.D degree after graduation.EEACTIVITIES IN CHINA’SPOWER AND ENERGY INDUSTRY Similarly to western countries, China’s EE industry consists of three types of companies namely state-owned company, private-owned company and international company. From the business scope point of view, those companies can also be divided into power grid corporation, power equipment manufactory enterprise and power generation company. It is noticed that the power grid and generation companies are almost state-owned (parts of them are local-government-owned). Private-owned and international companies only share parts of the market in electrical manufacturing. Current status There are two grid companies in China including the State Grid Corporation of China (SGCC) and a smaller China Southern Power Grid Company Limited (CSG). SGCC is the largest state-owned electric utilities company in the world. It transmits and distributes power in Northern China, Northeastern China, Eastern China, Middle China and Northwestern China, covering about 88% of the total territory of China. CSG takes charges of participating in the investment, construction and management of power transmission, transformation and distribution covering China’s five southern provinces of Guangdong, Guangxi, Yunnan, Guizhou and Hainan.  Power generation is done by five “power generation groups” namely China Huaneng Group, China Huadian Group, China Datang Group, China Guodian Group and China Power Investment Corporation.  Although large state-owned power equipment companies such as Shanghai Electric Group Co., Ltd, Dongfang Electric Corporation, China Xidian Electric Co., Ltd, and etc. have indigenous predominance in the market competition, the roles of private-owned and international companies cannot be neglected especially in the field of new technologies. For instance, Gold wind science and technology Co., Ltd got the highest domestic market share of the wind power plant (23.30%) in 2013. Sungrow Power Supply Co., Ltd shared 40% Chinese market of the solar inverter in 2013. Both of them are private-owned. Famous international companies e.g. ABB, Siemens, Schneider still have absolute advantages in the advanced power equipment.  Company type Research center Research area Power Grid China Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI) Electric Engineering and Automation, High voltage and insulation technology, Electrical engineering theory, Renewable energy generation China Southern Electric Power Research Institute (SEPRI) Electric Engineering and Automation, High voltage and insulation technology, Electrical engineering theory NARI group corporation state grid electric power research institute Electric Engineering and Automation, Electrical engineering theory, Renewable energy generation State grid energy research institute Energy economy and policy, Intelligentization of the power grid, Strategic management State grid smart grid research institute Electric Engineering and Automation, High voltage and insulation technology, Electrical engineering theory, Power electronics and motor drives Power Generation Huaneng Clean Energy Research Institute Clean energy technology China Huadian Corporation research institute Clean energy technology, Renewable energy generation China Power Investment Corporation research institute Clean energy technology Power equipment manufactory Shanghai Electric Group Co., Ltd research institute Renewable energy generation, Clean energy technology Dongfang Electric Corporation research institute Electrical engineering theory, Power electronics and motor drives Xi’an High Voltage Apparatus Research Institute Co., Ltd  High voltage and insulation technology Xi’an Thermal Power Research Institute Co. Ltd Clean energy technology, Power electronics and motor drives, Aumotive control technology of the power station B. Research activities  Compared with the international companies, China’s private-owned company invests much less in research. They rarely build professional research centers but entrust universities or research institutes to develop new technologies. In contrast, state-owned company pays close attention to the frontier research and the application of new technology. Most of the state-owned company founded professional research centers and hired high level researchers. Table II shows some examples of the research centers in the state-owned companies. Being different from the research activities in universities, research projects in corporation research institute are more practical and related to the requirements of the corporation. Usually, the research topic is only selected if the technology can be applied to the power grid in 5-10 years. A small portion of research in future technology is also encouraged in the institute. COLLABORATION EXAMPLES In recent decades, electricity consuming grows dramatically each year in China. In 2013, the total electricity demand in China is about 53.2 millionGWh which increases 7.2% compared with 2012. In all the newly installed power plants, Hydropower is the highest one with investment of 82.8 billion RMB in 2013. The investment in the thermal power plants reduced compared with last year. Renewable power capacity increases dramatically in latest years. In 2013, the newly installed wind power was 16088.7MW in mainland of China and the cumulative capacity reached 91412.89MW, which were both highest in the world.  Application and development of new technologies result in many challenges on the organization and education of power and energy industry companies. To meet those challenges, the government, company and university cooperate closely in recent years and some typical collaboration models are developed. Government dominated model: excellent engineer plan In 2010, the ministry of education of China released the  “excellent engineers education training plan” (abbreviation for “excellent engineer plan”) which aims to train a large number of high level engineer to mix the gap between the enterprise requirement and the traditional engineering education in the universities.  As defined in the Excellent engineer plan, the industry and university have to collaborate closely in the engineering education. Industry should take part in the education procedure by participating in the design of training plan, course contents, evaluation method and etc. The university should educate the students following the general engineering or industry standards. More attentions should be paid to the engineering and innovative capability of the students. In many universities, some of the undergraduate and graduate students majoring engineering disciplines are selected to take part in this plan and EE is one of them. University dominated model: university science and technology park  The world’s first university research park started in the early 1950s near Stanford University, and foreshadowed the community known today as Silicon Valley. In China, the science and technology park are supported by universities in order to bring in industry with which they can collaborate, and by local government in order to improve the prosperity of the community.  Many famous companies setup branches in the park with the intent of creating high technology economic development and advancing knowledge. Within the platform of the university research park, entrepreneurship, talent, and economic competitiveness can be comprehensively utilized to develop, transfer, and commercialize new technologies. At the same time, the employees engaged in the new technology can be trained with the help of university resource. Company dominated model: Joint Research Centre  In China, industry-university joint research center is attractive to the state-owned large companies. The longterm research cooperation on the common interests of the industry and university can be achieved in the center. The intellectual property right in the cooperation is shared by the industry and university. Students participating in the joint research are potential employees for the company and the education resource in the university is effective supplementary to the company’s routine training.  It is noted that some international corporations, e.g. ABB, Siemens, Mitsubishi also founded joint research centers in some famous universities. One of the reasons is that engineering professions are popular than that in western countries and many students with the major of engineering can graduate which provide enough reserves of engineering talent.  Apart from the above cooperation models, project collaboration is the most common choice by the privateowned companies. In this model, the company provides funding to the research group in university to develop the defined technology or prototype case-by-case. DISCUSSION AND CONCLULSTIONS Universities played a very important role in the product escalating and new technology development of the power industry in China. Nowadays, the research ability of the industry, especially the state-owned corporations, becomes stronger and stronger. The industry is replacing part of role of the university in the research activity. The university has to consider its transformation from the application research to the fundamental research. Advanced technology which may be applied in 10 years or more should be the main topic of the research activities in the university. The privateowned corporation should put more efforts and money on the application research and technology innovation in order to survive in the cruel market.  The education ideal of modern university has been changing from elite education to general education. Under this global trends, industry should participate more and more in the engineering education. Government can play an important role in the engineering education and universityindustry collaborations, which should never be ignored in the future. Therefore, the ideal model for the engineering development should consider multi-level structure including the top-level strategy by the government, middle-level university-industry cooperation mechanism and the basic university education at the bottom level. Analysis of Single Shorted Square Microstrip Antenna. Abstract — Smaller size microstrip antennas are obtained by shorting the patch on its edge or inside the patch. Recently design of single shorting post loaded square microstrip antenna fed by microstrip line is reported. It is reported that for an appropriate position of shorting post, antenna can exhibit lower cross polar radiation pattern. In this paper, detailed analysis for explaining the lower cross polar radiation pattern in single shorting post placed square microstrip antenna is explained. The shorting of patch yields two resonant modes of which second higher order mode (TM3/2,0) is nearly equal to TM10 mode frequency of the shorted patch. At this resonant mode half wavelength variation in currents is observed along shorted patch length which exhibits smaller cross polar level bore sight radiation pattern. Further resonant length formulation at shorted TM1/2,0 and TM3/2,0 modes for varying shorting post positions is presented. Frequencies calculated using the same agrees closely with simulated results.  Index Terms — Compact shorted microstrip antenna, Higher order mode, Resonant length formulate. In modern day communication systems, microstrip antenna (MSA) which are easily integrated with microwave integrated circuits are preferred [1 – 3]. But in the era of miniaturization MSAs that occupies smaller patch size are needed. For this shorted MSAs are widely preferred [1 – 5]. Use of shorting method realizes quarter wavelength antenna from conventional half wavelength antenna and it offers more than 70% reduction in patch size at given resonance frequency. Shorting pin leads to unsymmetrical distribution of fields with respect to coaxial feed point which gives radiation pattern showing higher cross polar components that realizes elliptical polarization [1 – 6]. This polarization will be useful in personal communication antenna designs as it can receive signal from any directions other than the principle E-field direction of the receiver patch [6].Larger value of quality factor of cavity below the radiating patch gives smaller BW in shorted MSAs. In conventional half wavelength MSA, BW is increased when more than one resonant mode is present [1 – 3]. Second resonant mode is introduced by using additional parasitic MSA which is coupled to fed the MSA or by cutting resonant slot inside coaxially or indirect proximity fed MSA [1 – 3, 7 – 13]. The BW of quarter wavelength shorted MSA is increased by cutting U-slot, V-slot, inside MSA or by using their multi-resonator configurations in which additional shorted MSAs is used [14 – 17]. By using these U-slot or rectangular slot, dual frequency MSA has also been obtained [17]. Slot cut technique is more preferred for to realize dual or wide band designs using shorted MSAs, since they does not increase patch size. In broadband and dual band shorted MSAs the feed point is required to be placed nearer the shorting post to realize input impedance matching. This may impose practical limitation as feed point in the immediate vicinity of shorting post may be difficult to realize. Recently a new feeding technique for shorted MSA fabricated on thinner substrate using microstrip line that is placed near the shorting point is reported [18]. The detailed parametric study for variation in shorting post position for impedance matching as well as cross polar level in the radiation pattern is presented in [18]. The analysis is reported for single and dual shorted square MSA (SMSA). It is shown that appropriate placing of shorting post gives broadside radiation pattern with lower cross polar levels especially in dual shorting condition [18]. It is reported that the mode at which this pattern is obtained shows similar field distribution to that of fundamental patch mode and has nearly the same frequency [18]. Thus the novelty in the work reported in [18] lies in only providing impedance matching for shorted patch but not for providing patch area reduction, as the shorting technique is used. The similar response can be obtained using conventional SMSA fed with inset feed microstrip line, as shorting can be avoided in antennas which are integrated with microwave integrated circuits, asit will affect impedance matching over rest of circuitry.  When the MSA is loaded using shorting post then a mixed boundary condition is present in the patch (open and short circuit condition). This gives uni-polar variation in the field distribution across the patch at fundamental mode whereas depending upon the feed point location, it may give bi-polar field variation at higher order modes. In convention MSA (i.e. without shorting post) fields will always show bi-polar field variation and it always equals integer multiples of half wavelength variations (i.e. identical boundary condition). Whenever an antenna exhibits lower cross polar radiation pattern aperture distribution across the patch periphery is symmetrical. In shorted antennas due to mixed boundary condition symmetrical distribution across the patch cannot be realized. Therefore in [18] which resonant mode that gives this low cross polar radiation pattern which is nearer the fundamental mode frequency of un-shorted patch is not explained. To investigate the same, detailed analysis for single shorted SMSA is presented in this paper. The patch dimensions same as that reported in [18] are selected. Surface current distributions at excited modes as per resonance curve plots along with respective simulated radiation patterns plots were analyzed, for microstrip line fed equivalent SMSA and shorted SMSAs. The shorted SMSA has fundamental mode frequency (TM1/2,0) which is lower than TM10 mode frequency of equivalent SMSA. The next resonant mode frequency for same microstrip feed line location is TM3/2,0 that shows nearly half wavelength distribution of fields/current along the patch length. The TM3/2,0 mode gives lower cross polar radiation pattern at frequency very close to TM10 mode of microstrip line fed SMSA. The position of shorting post alters TM1/2,0 and TM3/2,0 mode resonance frequencies that gives dual frequency response with varying frequency ratio. Further resonant length formulation for TM1/2,0 and TM3/2,0 modes in shorted SMSA for varying shorting post locations are proposed. Frequencies obtained using these formulations gives closer matching with simulated frequency. In future scope of the present work, proposed formulations will be used in designing of shorted SMSA in 1000 MHz frequency band. Thus the proposed works explains working of shorting post loaded SMSA which gives broadside radiation pattern in terms of patch resonant mode and also proposes its resonant length formulation, which is not reported in [18]. In 1000 MHz range, MSA will be studied using FR4 substrate (Hr = 4.3, loss tangent = 0.02, h = 0.16 cm). MICROSTRIPLINEFEDSHORTEDSMSA The microstrip line fed SMSA as reported in [18] is shown in Fig. 1(a). SMSA is fabricated on RO4003C, having parameters, Hr = 3.55, h = 0.1524 cm and loss tangent = 0.0027 and has length of 4.0 cm [18]. The SMSA is shorted using wire of radius 0.05 cm and it is fed using microstrip line of width 0.13 cm [18]. The plot of real part of input impedance against varying shorting post location is shown in Fig. 1(b). With decrease in ‘xs’ initially the frequency increases and for ‘xs’ = 0 cm, it reduces to frequency of around 2200 MHz. The input impedance also reduces with decrease in ‘xs’. The reduction in impedance is attributed to the close proximity of shorting post with respect to microstrip line. The surface current density variations with respect to shorting post positions and equivalent radiation pattern plots are given in [18]. It is reported that when shorting post position (xs) increases, then the cross polar levels reduces [18]. The equivalent SMSA (without shorting post) was simulated using IE3D software for the same microstrip line feed position. For this its TM10 mode resonance frequency was found to be 1945 MHz. As observed from Fig. 1(b), resonance frequency in shorted SMSA was found to be higher than TM10 mode frequency of SMSA for different values of ‘xs’. However as reported for shorted antennas, they offer frequency which is lower than the frequency of un-shorted TM10 mode. Thus which resonant mode in the shorted square patch shown in Fig. 1(a) yields lower cross polar radiation pattern with slightly higher frequency (compared with TM10 mode) is unexplained in [15]. To understand the same, detailed analysis for shorted SMSA is presented below.SMSA fed using microstrip line and its (b) variation in real part of input impedance against shorting post positions [18] III. ANALYSIS OF MICROSTRIP LINE FED SHORTED SMSA Simulated resonance curve plots obtained using IE3D, for microstrip line fed square patch for two microstrip feed locations is shown in Fig. 2(a, b). At location ‘A’, resonant peaks due to TM10, TM20/TM02 and TM12 modes are observed. Since the square patch is selected, TM02 and TM20 mode frequencies are nearly same and hence single peak due to same is present. When the feed line is placed at point ‘B’, along with above modes, TM11 mode is also observed. Of these resonant modes, TM10 mode offers radiation pattern in broadside and has lower cross polar component. Further this SMSA is shorted as shown in Fig. 2(a) and the shorted SMSA is simulated for feed locations ‘A’ and ‘B’ and respective plots are shown in Fig. 2(c). In shorted SMSA, for feed point at location ‘A’, a mode at frequency of 860 MHz, is seen. Currents exhibits quarter wavelength variation at this mode which is from the patch center (i.e. shorted point) and towards the patch corners as shown in Fig. 3(a). This is the Le is in cm and f1/2,0 is in GHz This value is close to the simulated frequency. This mode is referred to as TM1/2,0 mode since it exhibits quarter wave variation from the shorting post to opposite corner patch points. The next peak for the same feed position corresponds to SMSA’s TM10 mode as shown in Fig. 3(b). This mode is present in shorted patch as shorting post is placed in patch center wherein field atTM10 mode is minimum. When the feed is placed at point ‘B’, then in addition to above resonant modes, additional mode is observed at frequency close to 3000 MHz. At this frequency surface currents shows half wavelength variation along patch width and length as given in Fig. 3(c).Because of offset feed, this is due to the patch TM11 mode. Further resonance curve plots for varying location of shorting post are given in Fig. 3(d). Plots are shown for reduction in ‘xs’ from 2.0 to 0.5 cm.Current distributions at observed resonant modes and (d) variation in real and imaginary part of input impedance for decreasing shorting post location for microstrip line fed shorted SMSA In this shorting post position variation, microstrip line feed is placed at point ‘A’. With decrease in ‘xs’, TM1/2,0 mode frequency reduces. The next mode frequency increases with decrease in ‘xs’. At ‘xs’ = 0, this modal frequency is near the TM10 mode frequency of SMSA. Current distributions at this peak for ‘xs’ = 1.5 and 1.0 cm is given in Fig. 4(a, b). At this mode current exhibits half of the wavelength variation across shorted patch length. Further it also exhibits one quarter of the wavelength variation from the patch corner and towards shorting point. Because of this variation, this mode is referred to as TM3/2,0 mode. In RMSA or SMSA, the TMmn mode means field shows ‘m’ half of the wavelength variations along patch length and ‘n’ half of the wavelength variations along width of patch. Therefore here shorted patch modes are referred to as TM1/2,0, TM3/2,0 wherein they shows quarter wavelength (half of half wavelength) or three quarter wavelength variation from shorting post. The second index in shorted patch is due to number of half of the wavelength variations along width of patch, as open circuit boundary condition is present. Surface current and (c, d) simulated radiation pattern plot for varying shorting post position at TM3/2,0 mode for shorted SMSA At modified TM3/2,0 mode, radiation pattern for two values of shorting post positions is given in Fig. 4(c, d). As half wavelength variations are present along patch length, antenna shows radiation pattern in broadside with lower cross polar components. Thus the mode referred to in [18] wherein lower cross polar patterns are observed is TM3/2,0 and it is the higher order mode of shorted patch. Depending upon shorting post position this mode has nearly the same resonance frequency as that of TM10 mode. By studying current distributions at first two resonant modes in shorted SMSA, formulation resonant length at them is proposed, as discussed below.      IV. RESONANT LENGTH FORMULATION FOR SHORTED PATCH MODES IN MICROSTRIP LINE FED SHORTED The surface current distribution at TM1/2,0 for different shorting post location is given in Fig. 5(a, b). An equation (1) does not give closer accuracy for varying shorting post locations as surface currents varies predominantly along two paths in patch, towards the shorting post, as given in Fig. 5(a, b).Distribution of surface currents at TM1/2,0 mode for shorted SMSA for varying shorting post position The resonant length at TM1/2,0 mode is formulated by using equations (3) and (4). Here lengths ‘L1’ and ‘L2’ are two surface current lengths along paths as depicted in Fig. 5(a, b). Effective length equals average of lengths ‘L1’ and ‘L2’ as given in equation (5). Using equation (2), frequency is calculated. The % error between simulated and calculated frequency is calculated by using equation (6). Frequencies and error plots are given in Fig. 6(a). Over varying shorting post positions, proposed formulation gives closer match with IE3D results. sL x1L mode, resonant length formulation is realized by using equations (7). Here the effective length is equated to three quarter wavelengths.Using equations (8) and (6), resonance frequency and % error between two values is calculated, respectively and they are shown in Fig. 6(b). Over varying shorting post positions calculated frequencies closely agrees with simulated frequency. Fig. 6 Frequencies and % error plots at (a) TM1/2,0 and (b) TM3/2,0 modes for microstrip line fed shorted SMSA 
The detailed analysis for shorted SMSA fed by microstrip line is presented. The shorting post modifies the patch resonant modes. Position of shorting post modifies current distributions at higher order TM3/2,0 patch modes which gives lower cross polar radiation pattern. This frequency is closer to TM10 mode of equivalent SMSA. By studying variations in current distributions at reduced frequency TM1/2,0 and TM3/2,0 resonant modes, resonant length formulations for them is presented. Frequencies calculated using formulations shows close match with IE3D results. Thus presented work here clearly explains functioning of shorted microstrip line fed antenna in terms its resonant modes and proposed formulation will help in to design similar shorted antennas at different resonance frequency. Research on Polarization-Depolarozation Current of Oilimpregnated Paper after Electrical-thermal Aged. Abstract— The primary insulating material in the converter transformer, oil-impregnated paper, is subject to a complex electric field, mainly including the direct current (DC) stress, the alternating current (AC) stress and relatively minor harmonic stress. In order to investigate the effect of electrical-thermal aging on the oil-paper insulation properties, the breakdown voltage and polarizationdepolarization current of oil-impregnated paper samples with different aging conditions were measured respectively. Firstly, the operation electrical field of transformer valve windings was simulated in the PSCAD software, which manifested the proportion of the prominent components—DC stress and AC stress. In terms of the simulation result, the oil-paper sample with different aging hours were prepared by conducting the laboratory accelerated electrical-thermal aging tests. Afterwards, the polarization-depolarization current of samples aged 0 h, 48 h, 72 h, 96 h and 120 h were measured. It showed that electricalthermal aging caused the deterioration of oil-impregnated paper, resulting in the increase of polarization-depolarization current. Keywords—oil-paper insulation; AC-DC combined stress; polarization-depolarization current; breakdown voltage The converter transformer is one of the most important electrical equipment in the high voltage direct current (HVDC) transmission system. The valve side windings of converter transformer bear not only the alternating current (AC) and the direct current (DC) stress, but also the impaction generated by DC full-voltage startup and polarity inversion. Thus the operation stress is complex for the main insulation, i.e. oilimpregnated paper. It may also lead to insulation failure during operation when the electric field distortion exceeds to a certain degree. In the past few decades, insulation diagnostic techniques were mainly based on dielectric relaxation methods such as Polarization and Depolarization Current (PDC) [1]. It has been observed that in the purpose of insulation condition monitoring, PDC method performs better than other time domain techniques. In a typical PDC measurement, the transformer insulation is first charged with a step-like DC voltage for a certain period. The current generated during the charging period is recorded and known as the polarization current. After the charging period, the insulation is short circuited, and the discharging current is also recorded and known as de-polarization current. The polarization current is related to the alignment of dipoles and current conduction phenomenon, while the depolarization current is due to the relaxation of previous polarized dipoles. As the age of transformer increases, the oil-impregnated paper degrades. Over time, many molecular chains are broken due to different physiochemical reactions. It was reported [2] that many acidic Project Supported by China Southern Grid Project (K-YNKJXM20160149) and National Natural Science Foundation of China (51737009). compounds were formed due to such chemical reactions. Therefore, the quality of the insulation reduced and its affinity towards polarization and depolarization current changed. In the same way, these physiochemical reactions during the aging caused the decline of the electric strength, which was reflected on the increase of the moisture content.  In this paper, the operating electric field of the valve side windings in converter transformer was simulated in the PSCAD software, which manifested that the proportion of the prominent components in the insulation are DC stress and AC stress. Afterwards, based on the AC-DC combined stress, the oil-paper samples with different aging hours were prepared by conducting the laboratory accelerated electrical-thermal aging tests. Finally, the polarization-depolarization current of samples were measured, and the resulted were discussed.Operation Electrical field simulation in PSCAD Converter stations, include rectifier stations and inverter stations, are crucial in the HVDC transmission system. The converter transformers in the converter stations bear the task of energy conversion between AC and DC side. To investigate the operation electrical field of converter transformer valve windings, model of rectifier station with two convert transformers was built by Power System Computer Aided Design (PSCAD) simulation. The voltage level of the HVDC system is 500 kV. For the converter transformer of the rectifier station, three phase diode bridge with twelve-pulse rectifier topology is extensively used. The twelve-pulse rectifier consists of two parallel six-pulse rectifiers, and one connects to the three-phase AC utility via a delta-wye (△-Y) transformer, the other connects via a wye-wye (Y-Y) transformer in terms of reducing the magnitudes of the characteristics current harmonics using leakage inductances of the transformer windings as filters. An AC utility source connected via converter transformers to a three-phase diode bridge twelve-pulse rectifier feeding an inductive load is shown in Fig. 1.  In addition, the three-phase AC utility is presumed to be ideal. The three-phase filters installed on the AC grid can mitigate AC utility line current harmonics. The power diodes in the twelve-pulse rectifier are assumed to be ideal from the commutation perspective in that the turn-on and turn-off times are considered to be negligible. The voltage waveform of converter transformer valve windings is shown in Fig. 2.  Table 1 depicts the fast fourier transform (FFT) of the voltage waveform in Fig. 2. Based on the simulation results, the DC component accounts for the largest proportion, which is around 392.9 kV. Another parimary component is the AC component at 50 Hz, with the value of 170.9 kV.It can be concluded that under the operating conditions, the value windings of converter transformer bears mainly the DC voltage and sinusoidal voltage at 50 Hz,  and the ratio of voltage amplitude is about 2.3 to                                Electrical-Thermal Aging Test 1. Samples Preparation The oil used in the present study was mineral oil typed #25 produced by Chang Cheng Company. And pressboard was cellulose insulation paper provided by Hua Peng Company with single layer thickness around 300 μm. Firstly, insulation paper was cut into circles of 8 cm in diameter. Then, oil and pressboard were dried under vacuum condition at 70oC for 24 h, respectively. Finally, pressboard was immersed in insulation oil under vacuum condition at room temperature for 24 h. 2. Electrical-Thermal Aging of Samples Based on the simulation in section A, the aging circuit provides a AC-DC combined periodic stress. If the aging voltage for the oil-paper sample is 10 kV in rms, the electric field for DC stress should be 6.6 kV in amplitude, and the electric field for AC stress should be 2.2 kV in rms at the frequency of 50 Hz. Fig. 3 depicts the aging circuit simulation in Multisim, The V1 and V2 represent the DC and AC source, respectively. The equivalent oil-paper sample consists of R2 and C2. The functions of R1 and C1 are protection and isolation. In this case, the ACDC combined stress can be applied to the sample. The maximum and minimum stresses are about 9.2 kV and 3.8 kV respectively by measurement. As the temperature rises, the aging rate of insulation samples increases. Therefore, in the laboratory, the electrical-thermal aging experiment were conducted at the temperature of 120 ℃. After a period of 48 h, 72 h, 96 h and 120 h, samples were removed from the sealed aging cylinder. Thus the oilimpregnated paper samples with different aging degrees were obtained. C. Polarization and Depolarization Current Measurement The PDC measurement is an effective time-domain method to diagnose the insulation condition of oil-paper insulated power equipment, such as converter transformer and power transformer. It is necessary for life evaluation in order to prolong the service life of converter transformer and ensure its safe and stable operation.   According to the principles of PDC, at first, the DC voltage is applied to the insulation samples for a certain period of time (tc), then a charging current flows through the samples, and this current is called polarization current ip. During this process, the current ip  is generated at the moment of the voltage applied, but it will gradually decrease during the whole polarization time tc. After tc, the charging position is transferred by the programcontrolling switch. The measurement system is short circuited, the current of a negative value is the discharging current called id, and the current gradually fade to zero during the period. The curves of polarization and depolarization current are shown.The principle of polarization and depolarization current measurement is shown in Fig. 5. In the measuring electrode device, protective electrode is used to eliminate the influence of leakage current. By this means, the polarization and depolarization currents of samples aged for 0 h, 48 h, 72 h, 96 h and 120 h were measured. For each sample, during the polarization process, the applied electrical field strength was set at 3 kV/mm, 5 kV/mm, 7 kV/mm, 10 kV/mm, 13 kV/mm, 15 kV/mm, 17 kV/mm, and 20 kV/mm. The polarization measurement time was set at 1800 s, at the same time, the depolarization time was 1800 s.  All the experiments were conducted at room temperature.RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS A. PDC Measurement of sample aged for 48 h During the charge period, the polarization current flowing through the sample will gradually decrease. In this paper, the electrical field was applied to the samples for 1800 s. After 1800 s, the polarization current decreased to a relative stable value.Taking the oil-paper sample aged for 48 h as an example, the polarization current curves at different electrical fields were shown in Fig. 6. The depolarization current curves were shown in Fig. 7.  The difference among various electrical fields was distinct. As the electrical field increased, the stable values of polarization and depolarization currents both increased, and the value of depolarization current was relatively lower. It was mainly associated with the influence of electrical field on the dipoles. According to the linear dielectric theory, the dipole polarization was enhanced with the electrical field increasing, which caused a boost in the relaxation current including polarization current and depolarization current. B. PDC Measurement of samples with different aged degrees Based on the above discussion, it can be concluded that the electrical field can boost the dipole polarization in the insulation sample and increase polarization current and depolarization current.  To investigate the difference performances among aged samples, the experiments of samples aged for 0 h, 48 h, 72 h, 96 h and 120 h were conducted under the electrical field of 5 kV/mm. And the polarization current curves of five samples were shown in It can be seen from the above figures, the depolarization current was still relatively smaller than the polarization current, this might be due to the dissipation of the insulation. Moreover, the relaxation current increased with longer aging time. This can be explained reasonably by the insulation degradation during the electrical-thermal aging. In this process, the cellulose in the oilimpregnated paper was destroyed by the hydrolysis, which could promote the moisture content in the insulation. It was proved by the result. Architectural Considerations for Next Generation IoT Processors. Abstract—Currently, the growth of the ﬁrst generation Internet ofThings(IoT)systemforlow-enddeviceshavinglessmemoryand infrastructureischallenged dueto thelackof engineering support in terms of architecture, technology, hardware, privacy, security, and business. This paper discusses system engineering issues relevant in IoT processors and builds a case for exploring rough set as an approximate computing technique in next generation IoT hardware. The proposed approach has a potential of dealing with inconsistenciesarisingatlayersinhardwareinfrastructureforIoT applications with a dominance at cloud and fog processing. The authors bring out a research direction in IoT as an engineering discipline with an emphasis on the impact of processor hardware extension. IndexTerms—Approximate computing, hardwaredesign,I nconsistency,inconsistentinformationsystems(IIS),indiscernibility,information gain, Internet of Things (IoT), IoT hardware, missing attribute, processor design, rough set technique (RST), smart city project (SCP), very large scale integration (VLSI).
I. INTRODUCTION INTERNETofThings(IoT)architecturecanbevisualizedas a model composed of four layers (application layer, service supportlayer,networklayer,anddevicelayer)[1].Thenetwork layerprovidesrelevantcontrolfunctionsfornetworking,mobility management, authentication, and transport capabilities. The servicesupportlayercaterstotheneedsoforganizedservicesat cloud/fog/edge interfaces in an integrated manner by providing seamlesshierarchicalreliability,availability,safety,andsecurity features.Thesecapabilitiesgiverisetoinconsistentinformation systems (IISs) [2] at every layer and the issues arising out of machine-to-machine and device-to-device communication. IoT protocols are inherently light weight type (e.g., 6LoPAN) and involves automatic (without human intervention) processingoflargevolumedatasetsinrealtime. TheimplementationofalgorithmsforhandlingIISusingtraditionalelectronicdataprocessing hardware suffers from nonavailability of speciﬁc hardware instructions as a processor architecture support. The situation is identical to the era when we did not have speciﬁc instructions (such as MMX) at a processor level to handle multimedia resources. The complete emergence of e-learning, YouTube was Manuscript The authors are with the Department of Electronics and Telecommunication, College of Engineering Pune, Pune411005, India(e-mail:,vsa.extc@coep.ac.in; rap.extc@coep.ac.in; abpatki.extc@coep.ac.in). Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/JSYST.2018.2890571Possible only after departing from traditionalcodingapplication programming interface (API) methodology to hardware intensivealgorithmicmethodologyinprocessorbuildingblocks.IoT infrastructure has been in the same transition phase and it is necessary to explore this from various perspectives beyond the routine themes such as business skills, IT skills, technology extensions, etc. Before digging deeper into the link that exists between the processor architecture and its impact on IoT infrastructure, let us brieﬂy discuss the real-time response as a basic challenge that leads to a signiﬁcant departure from API coded software to hardware instruction set support. The computing hardware platforms presently deployed are oriented from a numerical number-crunching perspective. It is in this context that arithmetic and logic unit (ALU) is the heart of any CPU. While suchlimitationwasdiscoveredinthepastandwassubstantially overcome by the digital signal processing community almostthreedecadesagobywayofintroducingamultiplieraccumulator (MAC) unit as a building block, it remained unnoticed by a largersectionoftechnologydevelopersasDSPwascateringtoa very small section of end products. Unlike this, IoT has a larger impact. The type of security attacks to IoT infrastructure reported [3] areindicativeofthefactthatmerelycontinuingwiththepresentapproachisnotuseful. Furthermore,MeltdownandSpectreﬂaw affect all modern processors from Intel, ARM, etc. [4]. The effect is also felt on fog and edge devices including smart phones and tablets. Operating systems such as Windows, Linux, Mac OS, Android, and iOS are exposed to such vulnerabilities. This is because of a speculative execution present on almost all the state-of-the-art processors that in turn predict the command or execution path using privilege kernel memory. In the context of IoT, this will result into security directed victimization, since most of the IoT operating systems such as mbed, Riot, Contiki are derived from Linux philosophy. The vulnerabilities are easily extended to the IoT operating system platforms too. To overcome these problems on PC and workstations, patches have been released. However, this is only a transition arrangement unless hardware level solution for processor architecture is incorporated into edge devices and fog platforms. Theauthors,therefore,re-exploretheInternationalTelegraph Union—Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU-T) approach as shown in Fig. 1 for assessing information systems inconsistencies at different layers from IoT hardware perspective. It is, therefore, necessary to deviate from the numbercrunching perspective of computing hardware and dwell intothe approximate processing hardware paradigm (on top of conventional ALU). TheauthorsexplorethefoundationsofIoTInfrastructurewith a speciﬁc purpose to: 1) understand the major technology breakthrough that will betheresultofapproximatecomputingasanintegralpart of IoT hardware building blocks; 2) develop case study for research direction in IoT as an engineering discipline; 3) understand the impact of rough set based processor hardware extension; 4) develop computational footprint adaptationals using rough set technique (RST) [2], [5], [6] (such as RISC architecture three decades ago). Table I highlights IoT hardware and software components with ITU-T layer-wise features and its signiﬁcance. As IoT hardware has no accepted deﬁnition, the discussion here encompasses cloud/fog/edge computing processors and sensor networks. An emphasis on power/energy consumption therefore is given by introducing and supporting cognitive computingforIoTandbyremovingtheexistingbottlenecksarisingout of number-crunching (it needs multiple calculations and makes these systems more intensive thereby increasing workload and memoryrequirements)perspectiveofcomputinghardwareplatforms. The context of approximate computing is introduced using RST-based framework (low end devices [7]). This context can lead to evolving hardware, which will enhance the merely number-crunching scenario prevailed in the past in the domain of IoT. In addition, the number-crunching based encryption and crypto policies have to be readdressed in the light of Meltdown/Spectre processor ﬂaws. The current trend of deploying embedded hardware is inadequate to address issues arising out of inconsistencies at layers as hardware infrastructure. The next generation IoT architecture, especially the IoT supporting hardware platforms for IoT data processing have to be inclusive and need to eliminate the bottlenecks of computational processing for dealing with IIS perspective of IoT applications as shown in Fig. 1 and Table I. One such approach uses processor designs with modiﬁed instruction sets which are not available in the ﬁrst generation IoT devicesbasedonRaspberryPi,IntelGalileo,Arduino,orsimilar processors Theremainderofthispaperisorganizedasfollows.SectionII discusses the challenges for the IoT community and provides solutions as well as introduces approximate computing technique. Section III presents some case studies where RST could be used to further illustrate our vision of the next generation IoT hardware. Section IV highlights the computational workloadduetoIISsinanIoTenvironment.SectionVhighlightsthe existing ﬁrst generation IoT hardware. Section VI explores the next generation IoT hardware. This section discusses the role and scope of approximate computing and rough set in the next generation IoT hardware. Section VII concludes this paper by establishingtheneedforsolvingtheproblemsarisingoutofthe IoT environment using CHALLENGES AND EMERGING TRENDS In spite of several encouraging market forecasts and projections, the past decades witnessed a very limited growth in IoT deployment.Thevariationsinthedeploymentmethodologiesin the IoT-based smart systems are so diverse that 8/16/32 b processorssuchasArduino,PIC,ARM,andIntelGalileoareshown asprospectivecandidatesforprocessingplatforms.Thiscreates an impression that it is a distributive network of tiny processors and completely ignores the issues connected to the deployment oflargesystemsandengineering systemssuchasmodeling and simulation for life cycle phases in massive technology of smart cities, which affect day-to-day life of the people.This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.Thus, an integrated view toward systems and humans is a prerequisiteforefﬁcienthumanmachinesystemsforsuccessful smart city projects. The authors were exploring these issues from academic and technology view point and it emerged that the IoT infrastructure was the primary concern. There is a lack ofadequatehardwaresupport.Inthiscontext,thedevelopments on machine learning algorithms by Google and the subsequent progress achieved were revealed by Google [9] through their proprietary tensor processing unit (TPU) hardware unit. TPU is a trend toward approximate computing.Challenges for the IoT Community Various challenges in achieving characteristics and requirements for the IoT community are summarized in the following. 1) Characteristic of IoT Systems: 1) Workload is related to organization, recognition, mining, search, analytic, and inference. The focus is diverting from calculating numerically precise results to correctness, which produces quite good results to produce an acceptable user experience. The problem with an IoT System is that today’s computers are designed to compute precise results even when it is not necessary. 2) Big data in part is dirty, non-homogeneous, and insecure. The associated computer architecture such as storage, information processing and analysis in real time of time-series data [10], and possibility of missing data attributes is a matter of concern. The problem here is that IT industry is not geared upforembracingartiﬁcialintelligence(AI)through hardware. 3) The traditional IT cloud and its ecosystem is only 60–70% similar to IoT cloud and its ecosystem. The seemingly ready IoT cloud can be rendered almost useless due to the 30–40% difference for all the applications. The problem here is that the traditional IT cloud, web, or mobility applications cloudusemuchbiggerdeviceswithmoreresources on the cloud side [11]. 4) Information overload due to handling of large databases is currently suffering from a surplus amount of irrelevant data [12]. 2) Requirement of IoT Systems: 1) Large scope computing implies fractal loading as against large scale computing. Fractal loading implies the coexistence of different but related things (data formats) at different levels of scale, opposing the maximization of the capacity of uniform communication channels dedicated to a single type of exchange. 2) Information gain is a useful indicator to decide whether particular data must be available in the database (for processing/computation) or can it be partitionedout(forstorageandretrieval).Thisconcept can be utilized to reduce the cloud processing computational load and to restore to edge/fog computing [13]. The problem therefore is that thepresent software implementation seems to be too slow (such as theoretical analysis) to use in IoT applications and needs development of hardware speciﬁc modules. 3) Scalable data analytic and event processing engine are required on the cloud side as well as the premise/gateways with a variety of SDKs and communicationagents,datacachingandbandwidth management as a different layer and levels of the hierarchy. The sensor data should be combined to infer an event (complex event processing—CEP) and respond to them as quickly as possible. An RST for detection-oriented CEP exists. 4) Powerdownlogic—withthenewgenerationofIoT things, low capacity (mAH) battery operated sensors are available which are resource constrained. 5) Machine intelligence quotient (MIQ) is a product speciﬁcation for IoT system. A fuzzy logic can be used for MIQ measurements. Standardization is a prerequisite for successful IoT smart cities. 6) The new in-memory streaming technologies that change the rate are required for some IoT applications. 7) Encryption/decryption (AES or DES)—Sensor level crypto security and/or hardware level crypto processors should be used to prevent attack at the edge. The scope of approximate computing using RSTs is an emerging potential technology because of the constant use of passwords and cryptographic keys buried in a computer’s kernel is a real-time probabilistic computation of Fuzzy hashing that facilitates computation of lower approximation and upper approximation using elementary set (ES) of the kernel memory snapshot. This context triggered piece wise hashes will be used in combination with the instruction set of rough set processor speciﬁcally when missing attributes are generated [14]. In the context of processing the real-time streaming data, Table II shows the sizes of cache, memory, etc., present in the latest processors for processing the ever increasing trillions of data. For the real-time requirement, the data needs to be processed at fog and edge interface. There is a never ending requirement of bigger cache and memory for processing trillions of data. Therefore, cache and memory that are installed today will be “limited” in size after a year. By using bigger size memory and cache day by day, IoT edge based devices will become power hungry system. Fig. 2 shows the orthogonality (neither similarity nor overlap) at the architecture level in IoT hardware.Toachievethequalityattributesindesign,implementation, and deployment; the architecture of processors, sensors, wireless sensor networks, and power supply systems are different. Merely scaling the existing systems will not serve the current day issues and/or problems arising out of the characteristics and requirements of IoT systems. These two issues have not been addressed adequately. The high speed processing and/or multicore processing can never be a solution to seamless implementation at fog/edgeinfrastructure in an IoT environment in the light of “Dark Silicon”[15]experience.Theauthors,therefore,explorethecontext of approximate computing as a paradigm shift to enhance the performance of IoT hardware from power/energy consumption criteria. It is imperative to understand from the above salient characteristic features of IoT systems that the current practice of “Installation-Commissioning-Acceptance-Testing” adopted by industry should be replaced by real-time methodologies. Optimization has to be replaced with AI and cognitive informatics, which is a completely missing attribute of the present generation IoT platforms. The market projections of billions of IoT devices deployed by the end of 2020 can never be fulﬁlled since the existing IoT infrastructure does not cater to most of the requirements depicted in Section II-A. The authors take a large encompassing view and analyze these ten characteristics in the context of “number crunching” vis-a-vis “approximate processing” as illustrated in Fig. 3. In the absence of dedicated hardware for cognitive load processing, we resort to software solutions, which use numbercrunching hardware. Thus, resulting into an unacceptable level ofthroughput,performance,power/energybalance.Whilethere could be some disagreement on the grouping brought out on classiﬁcation, the fact still remains that approximate processing is emerging as a back bone for IoT computing needs. The authorsprovidethefollowingsimilaritytofacilitateunderstanding of the relevance of approximate processing in IoT. In the past, the approximate data processing was conceived and effectively used in multimedia systems (image, video, audio processing) that clearly led to the development of MPEG activities. Here, image compression, A to D and D to A audio conversions (analog to digital domain transformations and vice-versa) emerged as “deviations” from strict number crunching paradigm of the thencomputationalschemes.However,amorein-depthapproximate processing is proposed here using RSTs for IoT applications to address IIS projected at ITU-T framework. The “real time”inthiscontextisnotcontinuousinnature,butis“pop-up” inappearanceasandwhensensorsactivate(normallydormant). Unless supported through hardware support [16], we cannot address such concerns of ITU-T IISs.B. Approximate Computing Architecture Approximate computing has been identiﬁed and described in the recent literature as an alternative information processing methodology at hardware platform level. According to the researchers from Purdue University [17], a large number of applications utilize signiﬁcant computing resources and the spectrum ranges from mobile and IoT devices to large scale data centers. Such applications possess a high degree of intrinsic error resilience to their computations executed in an approximate manner. The correctness produces adequate results. It is a computation that returns a possibly inaccurate result rather than a guaranteed accurate result, for a situation where approximate result is sufﬁcient. The second use of the term approximate computing introduced by rough set knowledge processing community is a representationofdealingwithconceptgenerationtoformulaterule bases for incompletely speciﬁed systems. While the Purdue researcher’s approach promotes error resilient computational philosophy, we subscribe to an approach of inconsistency in information systems arising out of data. This use of the term is more appropriate in the IoT context since most of the IoT data analytic never assumes error resilient characteristics, especially in strategic industrial IoT applications. Architectural considerations such as energy efﬁcient approaches for IoT applications have been explored in the context ofsensornodesandenhancedcloudutilization[18].Whilethese aresigniﬁcantcontributionsforheavilydominatedsensor-based IoT infrastructures, the gap exists in the context of uncertainties arising out of the data ﬂow in IoT cloud and fog systems. Whiletheamountofenergyconsumedvis-a-vistrafﬁcratehave beenexamined,theprocessingincompetencyofthepresentIoT CPU/processor hardware still remains an unexplored area. Energy efﬁcient hardware or software and its availability in common IoT architectures has not been addressed for processor designinthecontextofinstructionsetandsupportforIoTspeciﬁc programming languages. The green perspective of IoT cannot be restricted only through cosmetic approaches [19] that can lead to scalability concerns. Thus, the processor level support is important. It is in this context that the rough set hardware coprocessor is used as approximate computing for dealing with IoT data analytic using IISs. To appreciate case studies highlighted in Section III, the researchers emphasize on creating a small footprint forcomputationatinstructionlevel. Theinformationprocessingcommunity emphasizes on processor with RAM, hard disk, network infrastructure, and operating system integration to support hardware. Whereas, the computational workload emphasizes on reducing the computational footprint irrespective of the supported RAM, hard disk, and network infrastructure. The recent trends are indicators for enriching approximate computing.PowerefﬁciencyisaprimaryconcernofIoT-related applications,bothatthesensornodeandonitscloud-computing counterpart[20].Symbolicaggregateapproximationcomputing provides solutions to many challenges associated with current data mining tasks [21]. While the above recent trends are essentiallyalgorithmicapproachesinIoTanalyticduetobigdata, hardware approach is necessary to have a substantial impact (large population if sensor clusters are present due to wireless sensor networks). CASE STUDY ThissectiondiscussessomecasestudieswheretheRSTcould beusedtofurtherillustrateourvisionofthenextgenerationIoT hardware. Most of these activities can be undertaken only after an adequate IoT hardware support is available.Research Directions for IoT Research in IoT emphasizes on massive scaling, architecture, robustness security, and human in the loop [8], integrating technological support. It leads to initiatives to 1) extendexistingtechnologiestoadapttoIoTenvironments; 2) model human behavior to incorporate human in the loop control; 3) major initiative to deploy IoT systems successfully. The ﬁrst initiative leads to a transition from IT to IoT using micro controller and embedded processor however serving a limited purpose to create conﬁdence in prototype development. Unless substantiated with impact oriented major modiﬁcation, it cannot lead to the targeted growth in IoT sector whichthemesaroundaqualitativechangephysicalsystems.The smart vision has to address challenges to integrate all the threeinitiatives. The issue of human behavior modeling has to be addressed as it is not the case of providing human interface through GUI enriched with multimedia support. The case of introducing fractal-based support therefore is illustrated in the context of which data virtualization and image processing are to be considered.IoT Deployment for Smart City Projects Data over collection for smart city projects appears to be a source of victimization. Li et al. propose inclusive cloud oriented security solutions for smart city data [22]. This may be acceptable at consumer IoT installations but not for industry because the issues such as tracking location, accessing photos, and address book are not relevant in industrial environment. As factory automation by the next generation will be real time focused, approximate computing oriented fog-based services will have dominance in industrial IoT. For smart cities, the concept of focusing on smart communication to support value added services has been projected [23]. AWebserviceapproachisproposedforurbanIoTenvironmentusingCoAPprotocols.Thisstudyconsidersprocessingrequirementbutnotcognitivefractalbasedcomputationalload. Human behavior is not modeled to support its interface and integration with image processing. As the road trafﬁc moves, an image as data virtualization gets generated instead of image processing because of the inherent limitation in the existing image processingtechniquedeployed. ARMcortexR52isusedtoexploit full potential of devices with hyper visors to manage safety and security. Cortex R52 does not support Lower approximation LA and Upper approximation UA and similar instructions (basic concepts of RST [24]) and thus not suitable for reducing computational footprints. Thecurrenthardwareandsoftwaretechnologiesdonotmake computingimageanalyticpossibleforreal-timeimageprocessing that forces human behavior modeling. Hardware architectural support to compute progression of fractal dimension at periodic time intervals on data has to be deployed to eliminate the human. To computer fractals and meeting the real-time requirements, computational load using procedural programming languagesleadstomulticorehardwareplatformsunlessresorted to declarative programming. It is therefore not possible to meet cognitive computational requirement of IoT deployment. Thus, there is a basic need to design new hardware architectures. To facilitate fractal related computation, rough set concepts using lower approximation LA and upper approximations UA have to iteratively followed. Smart city transportation—Fig. 4 shows the evolving plot at a visualization console for a city transport network in which an exact position of a bus can be traced, showing its starting to end destinations with an image evolving over a period of 30–45 min. The visualization console displays real-time sensor data minimizing the human in the IoT loop. The fractal dimension of the real-time transport data for different buses needs to be comparedwiththefractaldimensionofapermanentroadstructure, which is a prerequisite for a road transport system and is a must for one way trafﬁc, enhancing signal waiting time for the selected routes on speciﬁed hours.This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.Presently, such computations are only done for academic and postmortempurposesanddonotneedthereal-timesupport.The feasibility of such computations in the IoT sector is hampered due to unavailability of real-time support from hardware and architecture. In Table III, there are four conditional attributes. The use of LA, UA computation at every time stamp 10, 10:10, 10:20,andsoonisprerequisitetoevolvingfractaldimensionof the data shown on visualization console. The authors intend to refer to such cases such as confronting violence and vulnerability in the urban century, fractal disease growth in urban environment, fractal wave wind ﬂow, fractal trafﬁc congestion network, etc. [3].Edge Computing Edge devices such as sensors, actuators, and hand-held electronic gadgets such as smart phones are usually equipped with interface and connectivity on fog/cloud processing platforms in wirelesscommunication mode.Inthepast,issuesoftheprerequisites of context generation, preservation, and deployment for remote feedback were examined [26] but they have restrictions. Packages such as MATLAB cannot be deployed due to lack ofhardware and software including compilers and OS. Thus, concept generation can substitute context generation using LA and UA approach of RSTs. Typically, an IoT system is an amalgamation of cloud/fog/edge computing platforms. The trend to deploy edge computing as supplementary add on service for cloud ofﬂoading is an IT requirement recommending the collaborative edge computing for a smart city. We extend this argument in the context of large data quantity, low latency, and location awareness using the approach of generating rules which will be ad hoc in nature and will work only in real time. While discussing the case of video analytic for a missing child, the limitation of uploading camera data on cloud is discussed from privacy issues, broadband trafﬁc cost and data processingoverheadsforsearchingahugequantityofdata[13].To facilitateontheﬂygenerationofrulebasis,theapproachofusing reduct and core (a feature of RST) needs to be strengthened for programmability,dataabstraction,servicemanagement,andsecurityconsiderations.Thisispossibleifhardwaresupportexists toundertakethiscomputationsinrealtimesothatthebandwidth requirement and latency issues arising out of (to and fro) data transfer between edge platform and cloud computing platform can be kept at bare minimum. The issues of memory footprint and limitations of general multichip machine learning architecture had been examined in the past in the context of CNN and DNN [27]. A neural network supercomputer has been proposed forovercomingthecapabilityproblemsarisingoutofmultichip conﬁgurations. While a neural network supercomputer may be justiﬁed for specialized applications of strategic signiﬁcance. This approach is not feasible for IoT infrastructure primarily due to an impact of IoT as enabling technology for smart cities, industrial IoT, and similar high volume mass technology orientedapplications.Thishasbeendiscussedatlengthinthenext section.IV. COMPUTATIONAL WORKLOAD DUE TO IISS IN IOTENVIRONMENT Inthepast,bigdatafocusedonvolume,velocity,andveracity. The ﬁrst two have a completely different context in sensorbased IoT systems than the third one. Rapid machine learning algorithms were attempted in the past for integrating camera generatedandsynthesizeddatavirtualizationproducedartifacts but they were limited to cloud-based platforms equipped with huge amounts of RAM [28]. On the other side, sensor-based IoT infrastructure is constraint in terms of processing power and available RAM in which OS level support is minimal on IoT low end edge devices. In the moving sensor environments, IoT infrastructure can result in loss of data communication. The system used either cloud or fog computing infrastructure. A situation is illustrated wheredecisiontoswitchoverfromcloudcomputingtofogcomputing platform, after experiencing the bulk volume of missing attributes of data ﬁelds in information system, was signiﬁcant. The IoT system here caters to the needs of passenger buses, highway truck trafﬁc, and courier ﬂeet. Since transport systems upload data to the cloud in real time, it results into holes in the.This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.ARCHITECTURAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR NEXT GENERATION IoT PROCESSORS 7databases.ThecurrentpracticesofPlatformasaService(PaaS) does not handle the real-time data processing and updating the actuator feedback subsystem efﬁciently, as it is not within the existing (complete software approach) cloud capacity. The designers therefore switch over to fog computing partially. To catertothespeciﬁcworkloadarisingfromIISs,asupportofcoprocessorhardwarecanbedeployedinsteadofcloudcomputing infrastructure. IISson thecloud can at best support postmortem analytic as they are more stringent where the duration is in minutes and seconds. The electricity grid distribution system using IoT deploys populationofheavydutytransformersofdifferentpowercapacity, are geographically distributed and contains heterogeneous mix of units. Distribution transformers are core of such IoT infrastructureandfailurescanresultintoeconomicorotherlosses. FaultforecastingusingIoTisapotentialapplicationwheresensor and actuator control are restricted signiﬁcantly by response time consideration. To handle the IISs, processing at fog and edgeleveliscrucialandhardwareco-processorneedstobeprovided. Many platforms such as Intel, ARM, etc., cannot cope with the processing load arising out of IISs at fog and edge levels. In electricity grid distribution transformer fault diagnostic systems [29], the sources of missing attributes are typically due to lacuna in data collection process, redundant diagnostic tests, and unknown and/or corrupted data. The existing trend in data analytic is to discard such records and restrict the scope to the consistent-only schema of database snapshot. In IoT data analytic, characteristics of the original system cannot be preserved as all the data containing missing attributes is discarded. RSTs adopt the concept support approach and are dealt with attribute values: for a speciﬁc case is lost, is not relevant, and as “ do not care conditions.” The computational load justiﬁes a move from software to co-processor enabled IoT power grid. A need for self-healing architectures is discussed in [30] and it is expected that the second generation IoT systems can be operative using co-processor hardware support. The scope of hardware augmented multifunctional comprehensive PaaS adaption will be restricted if cutting edge co-processors are not available at fog/edge levels to provide mandatory self-healing capacity for high productivity PaaS options [31]. This study suggests approximate computing based on RSTs can facilitate modiﬁcations to assembly language, which in turn will promote development of high level programming languages. The concept of rough set with support for computation of missing attributes is a step toward architectural hardware support toward self-healing IoT systems. RST introduced bis a mathematical and AI technique for reasoning inconsistent, imprecise, incomplete data (properties of IIS) by evaluating equivalence relations betweentwosetsofdataandpartitioningitonthebasisofconcepts generated. For the same, RST does not use MAC kind of calculations. The authors had undertaken code proﬁling work for implementing RSTs to explore these issues and speciﬁcally in an environment where in addition to inconsistent information, there is also an equal amount of digital signal processing computational load [16]. The code proﬁling exercise undertaken onTMS320C6713 (TI DSP processor) development board using CCS 5.1 revealed that there is full justiﬁcation for developing hardware co-processor for supporting speciﬁc instruction set architecture for handling IISs. Code proﬁling of ES and CS algorithm (basic concepts of RST[24])showstheutilizationofL1,L2,S1,S2,D1T1,D1T2, D2T1, and D2T2 blocks. Furthermore, the frequency and type of instructions for inconsistent data analysis using RST are obtained. The code proﬁling results of ES and crisp set (CS) as in Table IV shows that multiplier M blocks are never used for any calculation. This may lead to Dark silicon and silicon wastage. Fig. 5 shows a normalized frequency count plot of various instructions for LA–UA, ES–CS mixed kind of jobs Bottle neck for several IoT devices data in real-time response—In an IoT-based environment, there are several billion devices connected. All these devices interact and generate long exe ﬁles to be accommodated in RAM. This can happen in cloud fog interface and it requires complex instruction set computing kind of instructions. For edge to fog interface, long exe ﬁles cannot be run due to a shortage of RAM size. Thus, instead of a compiler, an interpreter-based approach is used in edgecomputing.ThisisthereasonthatPython-basedRaspberry Pi devices are in risein IoTwhere the exe ﬁle is never produced as shown in Table V. Table VI shows a comparison of potential candidates for RST-based edge device. IntherealizationofIoTsystems,middlewareisdescribedas a key technology software system [32], to be the intermediaryThis article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.between IoT devices and applications. In the open problems andsuggestedsolutionsforIoTservicediscoverysectionofIoT middleware,theauthorshavefocusedontheneedofIoTmiddle ware design for lightweight device authentication, Denial of serviceattacksandend-to-endsecurity.Allthesemethodologies generate extra computational workload which is of IIS type. Thus, the need for hardware co-processor support at a device level is the need for strategic industrial IoT systems.V. FIRST GENERATION IOTHARDWARE A cursory look at the current technical literature of IoT hardware shows that the trend of “Installation-CommissioningAcceptance-Testing” is largely prevailing amongst hardware manufacturers. The availability of low cost, open source hardware platforms such as Arduino like boards (Atmel ATmega micro controller), the ARM CORTEX processor based boards, Intel Atom CPU based Edison and Galileo boards provides an opportunity for building low-cost IoT devices. All these platformsprovideagenericsensorfusionsupportanddataprocessingwithwirelesssupport.Linux-basedplatformslikeRaspberry Pi has high quality/reliability tradeoff. Microchip’s Amazon web services (AWS IoT) provides mutual authentication. The NXP’s low power i.MX6 SoloLite with an ARM Cortex-A9 core contains 512 MB of LPDDR2 memory and a 4 GB MMC ﬂash module [33]. This approach undermines IoT hardware in IoT infrastructure and is dangerous. Furthermore, cloud-based IoT services still has many considerations needs to be solved such as secure communication, accesscontrolsforIoTcloud,identifyingsensitivedata,in-cloud data protection, cloud architectures, etc. [34].VI. NEXT GENERATION IOTHARDWARE The present big data analytic methods deploy machine learning methods which are typically based on linear regression, random forest, and deep learning. The accuracy of most of the statistical methods for large data sets converge with that of Euclidean distance [35]. Moreover, these methods also lack cognitiveoverloading.Whiledatamininganddatawarehousing usenoncognitiveprobabilisticandmachinelearningalgorithms whichareultimatelyforconsumption byhumans; suchﬂexibility does not exist in IoT where most of things are devices and human intervention is kept bare minimum. Thus, the producer andconsumerofIoTdataarethings/devicesandhencecognitive overloading is an important issue when we deal with IISs. According to Embedded Internet of Things Ecosystem futuristicreport[36],IoTrequiresadifferentsetofmicroprocessors, drivers, peripherals, batteries, and operating systems than conventional embedded system used in general purpose computing systems. The authors have grouped the rough set related concepts in this section, although the authors preferred the introduction of rough set terminology and related concepts in the earlier sections.A. Information Systems/Tables An information system I (U, A) where U is a universal set representingtheobjects/instances/cases.Itisanon-emptyﬁnite set of objects. “A” represents the attribute set, the non-empty ﬁnite set of attributes/features. The rows represent objects, while thecolumnsrepresentattributevaluesbelongingtotheseobjects [37].Independentvariablesarecalledattributesandadependent variable is called a decision and is denoted by d. In this paper, we have utilized RST to approximately compute the threats on network security as shown in Table VII. This case study is indicativeofapproximatecomputinginanIoTenvironment.RST is a well-known technique for knowledge discovery and data mining process [38], [39],[40] and utilizes the approximation technique.This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.network security protocols which should be applied to prevent suchattacksissameforeachattribute.Evensuchsoftware-based analysis and prevention system is also not available today. For achieving continuous real-time monitoring and timestamp analysis for prevention of attacks, hardware-based on RST is required.H. RST for Fault Tolerability in IoT Subsystems Graceful degradation is a very signiﬁcant consideration in IoT infrastructure. Similarly, “smooth recovery” carries a reasonable computational workload. It is necessary to realize that these fall strictly under the approximate computing domain and number-crunching operations of ALU can never lead to small computational footprint. Incomplete decision tables—Missing attribute values commonly exist in the real world data set due to errors in the data collecting process such as recorded but erased later, redundant diagnosis tests, unknown data, and so on. Discarding all data containingthemissingattributevaluescannotfullypreservethe characteristics of the original system. The following approach [43] is considered. 1) The attribute value for a speciﬁc case lost is denoted by “?.”Ifforanattribute“a,”thereexistsacase“x”suchthat ρ(x, a) = ?, then the case is not included in any block. 2) The attribute values that do not matter for the ﬁnal outcome are denoted by “*.” Ifρ(x, a) = *, then the case should be included for all speciﬁed x values. 3) Partial do not care or attribute concept case values are denoted by “-.” If ρ(x, a) = -, then the case x should be included in the block for all speciﬁed values where it supports the concept automatically. 4) Inthepast,faulttolerancetypicallyaddressedissuessuch as hot standby and cold standby on a total conﬁguration basis. At the upper end system level, the exploitation through kernel (Meltdown/Spectre) is prone to these vulnerabilities. If approximate computation directed by ESs at the previous time share slice is deployed then such vulnerabilitiescanbeovercome.Thisisnotpresentlyfeasible duetotheabsenceofinstructionlevelsupporttointroduce fault tolerance on a select basis. DifferentsoftwaresuchasROSE,RSES,C,ROSETTTA,and MATLAB have been used by the researchers for bench marking several efﬁcient algorithms for reduct and rule generation [44]. The software provides ﬂexibility but becomes slow while handling large database in IoT environment. The vast computational complexity of big data causes a delay in the optimization process of software implementations. To obtain real-time processing requirements, power, ﬂexibility, fault tolerability, performance goals, hardware implementation of RST is needed. It is obvious that power/energy consumption issues ﬁnd a natural solution if RST-based hardware is deployed for IoT data processing. indecisionruleregisterwhilearithmeticoperationofcomputing strength, coverage and certainty factors are performed using arithmetic block. Unlike Pawlak’s orientation, Muraszkiewicz and Rybinski [46] explored the concept of RSP-based on cellular networks (matrix of interconnected elements of same type) and called it parallelroughsetcomputer(PRSComp).Thetrendsbroughtout by Lewis et al. [47] presented a self-learning hardware model based on cellular concept. Implementation based on UA, LA, core, and reduct calculation on Xilinx board. However, they did notexploretimecomplexity,spacecomplexity,andtypeofdata. Kanasugi and Matsumoto conceptualized a processor [48], [49]bycomputingdiscernibilitymatrix.Itcomputedreductand generated rules using Skowrons discernibility matrix with binary attributes. No discussion on space complexity. Time complexity = O(|U|2 |A|2). Some attempts by Sun et al. [50] made use of genetic algorithmbasedattributereductionsystem.TiwariandKothari[44], [51] have designed rough set co-processor utilizing pipelining between discernibility and reduct block. It supported Max attributes = 65, sharing main memory from host computer, data objects = 256, time complexity = O(RA|U|2). OntheimplementationofReduct-basedapproaches,thework of Jaroslaw et al. [52]–[54] computed short reduct and core based on discernibility matrix on FPGA. The emphasis is on reducing computational footprint irrespectiveofinfrastructureandutilizeedgecomputingforapproximatelycomputingtherulesinrealtimeusingRST.Asdiscussed in the earlier sections as well as in Table XIII, for supporting IoT infrastructure seamless implementation at cloud/fog/edge platforms, the RST hardware development in the past are inadequate. The major thrust for IoT hardware is on real-time activities arising out of scheduling of sensor eventsSETAnotherfocusareaoftheproposedarchitecturewillbeinthe formofextendingthesupporttocommunicationforITU-Trepresentation of IoT structure. The limitation of device-to-device (D-2-D) communication [55] in the context of authenticating devices is an ignored aspect because of heterogeneous mix of devices and network provider. To solve this issue, a softwarebased module running on fog platform is proposed which will make use of lower and upper approximation features to identify and conﬁgure in real-time smaller subsections of D-2-D communicationsegments.Thus,theexistinglimitationsofhardware level approach at device level gets partially resolved and allows us to address the issues arising out of the diverse networks and networkingstandards,heterogeneityofdevicesincludingunpredictablemobilityofdevices.SuchsituationneedsRSThardware that provides instruction set architecture support. Table XIV shows the proposed RST hardware database command set. CONCLUSION Whilethepaper bringsout maincontribution ofthistopicfor IoT hardware platforms, it discusses the need for a deviation from using commercially available off the shelf processors in the system level digital transformation. There is a need to strengthen processor design for AI and cognitive informatics to meet the new challenges. It is totally missing in the present generation IoT hardware. In this paper, the authors have carried out a study to justify that rough set has a potential of reducing computational footprint at instruction level by dealing with concept generation to formulate rule bases. Thus, RST can be considered as a potential direction for approximate computing technique for IoT applications. Introduction of instruction set for LA, UA at hardware will facilitate efﬁcient computation for IoT from systems perspective. Rough set can also provide specialized hardware support for missing attribute, redundancy isolation for data storage, information overloading, energy efﬁcient (portable devices) for the next generation IoT hardware exploration. Separate hardware based on RST for IoT needs to work in tune with various operating systems for IoT devices such as Contiki, RIOT, TinyOS, FreeRTOS, etc. Driver development feasibility is required for runningtheseoperatingsystems.Theproposeddevelopmentsin IoThardwarewillleadtostrengtheningthecognitivecomputing support in IoT systems
  